OLIVARES-ROJAS, JUAN CARLOS
Curriculum: IT15A015

País de nacimiento: México

Resumen biográfico
Profesor Investigador de la División de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación. SNI Nivel I. Perfil Deseable del PRODEP. Cuerpo Académico Consolidado en Procesamiento de Señales. Áreas
de Interés: Ciencia de Datos, Ciberseguridad y TICs en general en las áreas de energía, Salud y Agricultura
Información de contacto
Telefonos
Trabajo: (+52) 443 3121570

Correo electrónico
Registro 2015-12-28 18:35:07: jcolivares@itmorelia.edu.mx

Laboral: juan.or@morelia.tecnm.mx
Adscripciones a Tecnológico Nacional de México
2006-09-01
Instituto Tecnológico de Morelia
Profesor-Investigador Titular "C" en División de Estudios de Posgrado e Investigación (2025-08-16 - Actualidad)
Títulos académicos
2004-02-25
LICENCIATURA, Ingenierio en Sistemas Computacionales, CEDULA: 4481088, LUGAR DE ESTUDIOS: Instituto Tecnológico de Morelia
2006-10-20
MAESTRíA, Maestro en Ciencias en Ciencias de la Computación, CEDULA: 5085191, LUGAR DE ESTUDIOS: Centro Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo Tecnológico
2021-10-21
DOCTORADO, Doctor en Ciencias de la Ingeniería, CEDULA: 12738766, GRADO: Tecnológico Nacional de México / Instituto Tecnológico de Morelia LUGAR DE ESTUDIOS: Instituto Tecnológico de Morelia,
México
Extenso de CVU-TECNM
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
1/29

Productividad académica
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
2/29

Artículo
2026-12-27
Compresión/Optimización de Modelos Clínicos de Lenguaje Natural mediante Descomposición de Tensores y Cuantización Dinámica en Capas de Atención:
Búsqueda de Rango de Compresión con un Clúster de Alto Desempeño para Dispositivos Embebidos
Autor(es): Zavala-Díaz, Jonathan; Hernández-Alvarez, Bryan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
Deployment of natural language models in the healthcare sector faces significant challenges due to the high computational cost and size of current models, hindering their implementation in embedded devices
or resource-constrained environments. This paper proposes and evaluates an efficient compression methodology for clinical models based on RoBERTa, combining CANDECOMP/PARAFAC (CP) tensor
decomposition and dynamic quantization. The optimal selection of layers and compression ranks is performed through an exhaustive parallel search on a heterogeneous computing cluster using the MPI
master-worker paradigm, significantly accelerating the optimization process over a combinatorial space that is infeasible to handle sequentially. After identifying the best configuration, dynamic quantization is
applied to a Spanish clinical question-answering model, evaluating standard metrics such as exact match, F1 score, inference time, disk size, and parameter count. Results demonstrate a 66 % reduction in
model size and parameters, along with a 38 % speedup in inference, maintaining an accuracy degradation below 2.5 %. This strategy enables the implementation of advanced NLP models in real clinical
environments and low-power devices, opening new possibilities for artificial intelligence in digital healthcare.
REVISTA: Abstraction & Application - UADY (pags. 90-100), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-2635; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://intranet.matematicas.uady.mx/journal/descargar.php?id=447
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2026-12-15
Design and Evaluation of a Third-Order Regression Model for Estimating Glucose Levels from ECG Signal Features
Autor(es): Coronado-Reyes, Óscar Iván; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; García-Rodríguez, Eileen; Castro-Pimentel, Luis Alfredo, Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Diabetes mellitus, also known simply as diabetes, is a chronic disease that affects the absorption of glucose from food, increasing levels in the blood. This disease mainly affects adults (type 2 diabetes) but
can also occur in children (type 1 or childhood diabetes), as well as in pregnant women (gestational diabetes). Diabetes is one of the main diseases with the highest incidence and high mortality rate worldwide.
Diabetes is a disease for which there is no cure; however, continuous monitoring and control of blood glucose levels reduce the risk of associated complications, such as gastrointestinal issues, vision loss, limb
amputations (e.g., diabetic foot), and damage to vital organs such as the heart and kidneys. This article presents the results of the statistical and clinical evaluation for the estimation of blood glucose levels
based on features derived from the ECG signal. The primary features used as estimating variables were heart rate, heart rate variability, amplitudes of the R, S, T waves, and the QT interval. For the
electrocardiogram recording, lead VII was used. The ANOVA analysis showed a result of 0. 0.7236.The clinical validation using the Clarke error grid showed a validation data percentage of 58.54% in zone A,
39.04% in zone B, 1.21% in zone C, and 1.21% in zone D, with a correlation of 0. 8525.
REVISTA: International Journal of Combinatorial Optimization Problems and Informatics - Editada (pags. 426-436), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-5709; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://doi.org/10.61467/2007.1558.2026.v17i2.1110
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Electrónica)
2026-06-23
Techani: Use of technology as an ally in the management, monitoring, and control of Type 1 diabetes mellitus.
Autor(es): Contreras-Jimenez, Rocio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) is an autoimmune, unpreventable, and incurable disease in which insulin production ceases due to pancreatic beta-cell destruction. This work presents Techani, a web and
mobile system designed to enhance treatment adherence and patient monitoring through a culturally adapted interface tailored to the Mexican context. The system integrates Artificial Intelligence tools and
incorporates a broader range of variables than current applications, including mood, hydration, sleep, and atypical days, in addition to traditional clinical data. A mixed-methodology approach combining Scrum,
UI/UX design, and empirical data collection through physician surveys was used to identify relevant determinants of glycemic control. The proposed system aims to strengthen patient autonomy, facilitate
physician follow-up, and improve adherence by automating carbohydrate counting using the Mexican Food Equivalents System (SMAE). Compared to existing mHealth tools, Techani increases the number of
monitored variables by more than 40% and enables potential data integration for predictive glucose modeling. Limitations include manual data entry and a small convenience sample for usability testing. Future
validation studies will evaluate its clinical impact on glycemic control and treatment adherence, and integration with CGM data to assess its clinical impact on glycemic control.
REVISTA: Revista Mexicana de Ingeniería Biomédica - Sociedad Mexicana de Ingeniería Biomédica (pags. 1-17), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2395-9126; INDEXADO EN: Scopus
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://rmib.mx/index.php/rmib/article/view/1559/
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2026-05-01
DAGs and GRaSP Causal Inference Algorithms Combined and Applied to the Calculation of Insulin Bolus in Patients with Type 1 Diabetes
Autor(es): Contreras-Jimenez, Rocío; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is a chronic, non-preventable, and incurable disease that requires lifelong insulin administration. The principal challenge is calculating the prandial insulin bolus to avoid
hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia. Traditional bolus calculators are based on limited number of variables, but there are many variables that define the complex interactions among glucose levels, like
carbohydrate intake, physical activity, mood, and contextual factors. While recent artificial intelligence (AI) approaches have shown promise in glucose prediction, most remain correlational and offer limited
interpretability for clinical decision support. This study evaluates a causal inference-based framework for insulin bolus calculation using Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) and the Greedy Relaxation of the
Sparsest Permutation (GRaSP). Historical data from individuals with T1DM were analyzed, incorporating domain knowledge constraints to guide structure learning. A bootstrap-based stability analysis was
conducted to evaluate the robustness of inferred relationships. Results show that integrating prior medical knowledge reduces graph complexity and improves interpretability. However, bootstrap stability
reflects robustness of the learning procedure rather than causal validity. The findings suggest that the proposed framework is useful for generating plausible causal hypotheses, but not for confirming causal
relationships. Further validation using conditional independence testing, equivalence class analysis, and temporal causal methods is required. However, the proposed framework focuses on generating
plausible causal hypotheses rather than establishing causal validity, which requires further refutation-based validation.
REVISTA: Entropy - MDPI (pags. 506-527), SUIZA; ISSN: 1099-4300; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://doi.org/10.3390/e28050506
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2025-10-21
Optimizing Electrode Performance in EMG and EIT for Superior Muscle Data Acquisition
Autor(es): Melchor-Uceda, Irán Arane; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; González-Vázquez, Alberto; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Robledo-Ayala, Alejandro
Israel
Optimizing electrode performance in electromyography (EMG) and electrical impedance tomography (EIT) is critical to advancing muscle data acquisition. This study systematically evaluates various electrode
types, shapes, and materials, focusing on optimizing signal-to-noise ratio, durability, and long-term usability. A key contribution of this research is the identification of stainless-steel electrodes as the most
efficient option, demonstrating superior signal stability, oxidation resistance, and reusability compared to disposable alternatives. This finding not only improves the reliability of EMG and EIT measurements but
also offers a sustainable and cost-effective solution for clinical and research applications. By providing empirical evidence on electrode selection and design, this study lays the foundation for improved
methodologies in rehabilitation, sports medicine, and neurology, ultimately improving patient care and deepening understanding of muscle physiology.
REVISTA: Revista Mexicana de Ingeniería Biomédica - Sociedad Mexicana de Ingeniería Biomédica (pags. 1-20), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2395-9126; INDEXADO EN: Scopus
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://doi.org/10.17488/RMIB.46.SI-TAIH.1514
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2025-10-11
Towards A Clinical Interface For Speaker Identification And Speech-To-Text Transcription For Recording Medical Consultations In Spanish
Autor(es): Zavala-Diaz, Jonathan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Ramos-Diaz, J. Guadalupe
This paper presents the development of an advanced clinical interface built on the LattePanda Sigma, an embedded device designed for edge computing. The interface integrates OpenAI language models
and Whisper for automated speech-to-text transcription, together with accurate speaker diarisation in clinical settings using the pyannote/speaker-diarization-3.1 model. A dataset of ten doctor–patient
conversations in Spanish—translated and re-recorded to suit the local context—was used to evaluate the models. Automatic transcriptions generated by the models were compared with the reference
transcripts using the ROUGE metric. Average ROUGE scores of 0.9028 for the Small model and 0.9260 for the Medium model indicate high transcription accuracy. The reference transcripts were also used to
assess the segments identified by the pyannote model. Finally, the paper analyses the system’s usefulness and effectiveness in improving Spanish-language clinical records.
REVISTA: International Journal of Combinatorial Optimization Problems and Informatics - Editada (pags. 264-374), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-1558; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://ijcopi.org/ojs/article/view/900
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
2025-09-16
Performance evaluation of image stitching algorithms SIFT and ORB with cylindrical projection for OCR improvement
Autor(es): Naranjo-Alvarado, Eduardo; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) accuracy depends on image quality. This study evaluates image stitching techniques like Scale-Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT) and Oriented FAST and Rotated BRIEF
(ORB) with and without cylindrical projection to improve Optical Character Recognition performance. Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) and Word Error Rate (WER) were used as evaluation metrics. Results
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
3/29

indicate that cylindrical projection enhances image clarity and reduces distortions. Word Error Rate analysis confirms improved Optical Character Recognition accuracy, making cylindrical projection a valuable
preprocessing step.
REVISTA: Tencología y Ciencia Aplicada - Tecnológico Nacional de México (pags. 281-288), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2992-8338;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://jcyta.cenidet.tecnm.mx/revistas/tycap/14-Vol_8_Num_1_Enero-Junio_2025.pdf
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
2025-09-16
EMG Signal Analysis with STM32: Development and Evaluation of a Proprietary FFT Implementation
Autor(es): Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane; Martínez-Palomo, Mauricio; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Gutiérrez-López, Marcos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
his study presents the development and evaluation of a custom implementation of the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) for the analysis of electromyographic (EMG) signals using the STM32 microcontroller. The
FFT is a key tool in EMG signal processing, enabling the extraction of frequency information essential for applications in medicine, rehabilitation, and the control of devices such as prostheses. Despite the
availability of optimized FFT libraries, this work proposes a custom implementation aimed at improving efficiency and adaptability within the STM32 environment, a microcontroller known for its processing
capabilities and connectivity. The proposed implementation is evaluated in terms of performance and accuracy and is compared with standard libraries widely used in EMG signal processing. The results show
that the custom implementation offers significant advantages in terms of resource consumption and processing time, making it a viable option for real-time applications and embedded systems. This approach
provides an innovative solution for EMG signal analysis in portable and low-cost devices.
REVISTA: Tecnología y Ciencia Aplicada - Tecnológico Nacional de México (pags. 225-232), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2992-8338;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://jcyta.cenidet.tecnm.mx/revistas/tycap/14-Vol_8_Num_1_Enero-Junio_2025.pdf
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Electrónica)
2025-08-24
¿Red eléctrica inteligente? La IA mejorando la energía eléctrica
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen
La red eléctrica se ha modernizado en años recientes, particularmente a través del uso de tecnologías de información y comunicaciones como lo es la inteligencia artificial. Por lo tanto, es importante que la
sociedad conozca algunas pautas sobre esta área y lo que se desarrolla en nuestro país.
REVISTA: Gaiabit - Gaiabit (pags. 1-1), MÉXICO; ;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://gaiabit.com/red-electrica-inteligente-la-ia-mejorando-la-energia-electrica/
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2025-08-21
Detection and extraction of optimal features from power quality disturbances based on wavelet coefficient reconstruction and noise-robust methods
Autor(es): García-Rodríguez, Eilen; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Coronado-Reyes, Óscar Iván; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Méndez-Patiño, Enrique
The Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) is a well-established technique for detecting power quality disturbances, particularly transients. However, its practical implementation is often limited by its high
sensitivity to noise. The downsampling process in Multiresolution Analysis (MRA) introduces aliasing distortion, which can be mitigated by carefully selecting decomposition and reconstruction filters. As a
result, the accurate reconstruction of approximation and detail components is achieved, facilitating the extraction of key features essential for disturbance classification. This study proposes a noise-robust
methodology that effectively filters noise while preserving interference characteristics for detecting disturbances with magnitude variations, such as sags, swells, and interruptions. These disturbances exhibit
similar spectral and duration characteristics, making them difficult to distinguish from the pure signal, which has a fundamental frequency of 60 Hz and a magnitude variation of . The approach employs DWT
with MRA, followed by the reconstruction of approximation coefficients using the Inverse Discrete Wavelet Transform (IDWT). Feature extraction methods, including peak detection via local maxima
identification, are combined with noise-robust techniques like Shannon entropy and energy to detect oscillatory transients, harmonics, flicker, notches, and complex disturbances, such as sag and swell with
harmonics and sag and swell with oscillatory transients. The extracted feature vectors, consisting of eight elements, were used as input for six machine learning classifiers. Experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed detection and feature extraction techniques achieve classification percentages exceeding 99%, even under varying noise conditions, allowing for the differentiation of each disturbance type.
Most importantly, they enable clear distinction from the pure signal.
REVISTA: Computers and Electrical Engineering - Elsevier (pags. 1-21), PAÍSES BAJOS; ISSN: 0045-7906; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compeleceng.2025.110615
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2025-05-02
Noise Effects on Detection and Localization of Faults for Unified Power Flow Controller-Compensated Transmission Lines Using Traveling Waves
Autor(es): Rofdríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Gutiérrez-López, Marcos; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
This paper presents a comprehensive analysis of the effects of noise on the detection and localization of faults in transmission lines compensated with a unified power flow controller using traveling wave-
based methods. This study focuses on the impact of harmonic and transient noises, which are inherent to power generation, transmission, and UPFC operation. A novel algorithm is proposed combining the
Discrete Wavelet Transform and Clarke Transform to detect and localize faults under various noise conditions. The algorithm is tested on a simulated transmission line model in MATLAB/Simulink (Version
R2022b) with noise levels of 20 dB, 30 dB, and 40 dB and transient frequencies of 1 kHz, 5 kHz, and 10 kHz. The results demonstrate that the algorithm achieves an average fault localization error of 0.523%
under harmonic noise and 0.777% under transient noise, with fault detection rates of 96.3% and 90.75%, respectively. This study highlights the robustness of the traveling wave method in noisy environments
and provides insights into the challenges posed by UPFC-compensated lines.
REVISTA: Electricity - MDPI (pags. 1-16), SUIZA; ISSN: 2673-4826; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.mdpi.com/2673-4826/6/2/25
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2025-04-17
Detection of Abnormal Pedestrian Flows with Automatic Contextualization Using Pre-Trained YOLO11n
Autor(es): Núñez-Vieyra, Adrián; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ferreira-Medina, Rogelio; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
Recently, video surveillance systems have evolved from expensive, human-operated monitoring systems that were only useful after the crime was committed to systems that monitor 24/7, in real time, and with
less and less human involvement. This is partly due to the use of smart cameras, the improvement of the Internet, and AI-based algorithms that allow the classifying and tracking of objects in images and in
some cases identifying them as threats. Threats are often associated with abnormal or unexpected situations such as the presence of unauthorized persons in a given place or time, the manifestation of a
different behavior by one or more persons compared to the behavior of the majority, or simply an unexpected number of people in the place, which depends largely on the available information of their context,
i.e., place, date, and time of capture. In this work, we propose a model to automatically contextualize video capture scenarios, generating data such as location, date, time, and flow of people in the scene. A
strategy to measure the accuracy of the data generated for such contextualization is also proposed. The pre-trained YOLO11n algorithm and the Bot-SORT algorithm gave the best results in person detection
and tracking, respectively.
REVISTA: Mathematical and Computational Applications - MDPI (pags. 1-13), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2297-8747; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.mdpi.com/2297-8747/30/2/44
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2025-04-06
Optimal Selection of Sampling Rates and Mother Wavelet for an Algorithm to Classify Power Quality Disturbances
Autor(es): Medina-Molina, Jonatan Ali; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier; Chávez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Guerrero-
Rodríguez, Néstor Francisco
The introduction of renewable energy sources, distributed energy systems, and power electronics equipment has led to the emergence of the Smart Grid. However, these developments have also caused the
worsening of power quality. Selecting the correct sampling frequency and feature extraction techniques are essential for appropriately analyzing power quality disturbances. This work compares the
performance of an algorithm based on a Support Vector Machine and Discrete Wavelet Transform for the classification of power quality disturbances using eight sampling rates and five different mother
wavelets. The algorithm was tested in noisy and noiseless scenarios to show the methodology. The results indicate that a success rate of 99.9% is obtained for the noiseless signals using a sampling rate of
9.6 kHz and 95.2% for signals with a signal-to-noise ratio of 30 dB with a sampling rate of 30 kHz.
REVISTA: Computers - MDPI (pags. 1-14), SUIZA; ISSN: 2073-431X; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-431X/14/4/138
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2025-03-27
From GUI to VUI: A Natural Language Approach to Multimodal Medical System
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; González-Serna, Juan Gabriel; Ramos-Díaz, J. Guadalupe; Castro-Sánchez, Noé Alejandro; González-Murueta, Johan Walter
Within healthcare, the human touch between the doctor and the patient is extremely important. Unfortunately, most medical systems are based on user interfaces that make most doctors focus more on paying
attention to the screen when capturing information than on the consultation itself. This paper presents a methodology that allows converting a graphical user interface (GUI) to a voice user interface (VUI) to
automatically integrate a multimodal system. The methodology can be easily extended to other types of applications for building multimodal systems from already defined web GUIs.
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
4/29

REVISTA: Computación y Sistemas - Instituto Politécnico Nacional (pags. 295-309), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-9737; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://cys.cic.ipn.mx/ojs/index.php/CyS/article/view/5507/3892
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2025-03-01
Estudio de técnicas de aprendizaje automático para la estimación de la humedad del suelo en agricultura
Autor(es): Zavala-Díaz, Noel Alan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Zavala-Díaz, Jonathan; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Chávez-Campos, Gerardo Marx; Méndez-Patiño,
Arturo
La humedad del suelo es crucial en diversos campos, y su monitoreo para guiar el riego representa un desafío. El aprendizaje automático ha surgido como una herramienta prometedora para predecir con
precisión los niveles de humedad del suelo. Este estudio se centra en evaluar técnicas de aprendizaje automático para esta tarea, entrenando modelos con variables meteorológicas y mediciones directas de
humedad del suelo. Se implementaron cuatro algoritmos de aprendizaje automático, destacando el Gradient Boosting Regressor como el más efectivo. Además, se presenta un conjunto de datos procesado
que combina mediciones meteorológicas y de humedad del suelo, esperando que sea útil para futuras investigaciones. Este enfoque busca mejorar la comprensión y la capacidad de previsión de la humedad
del suelo, crucial para la planificación agrícola y la gestión del agua en la agricultura.
REVISTA: Research in Computing Science - Instituto Tecnológico Nacional (pags. 79-92), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1870-4069; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://rcs.cic.ipn.mx/2024_153_9/Estudio%20de%20tecnicas%20de%20aprendizaje%20automatico%20para%20la%20estimacion.pdf
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Bases de datos)
2025-02-28
Implementación de modelos preentrenados de procesamiento de lenguaje natural para la tarea de pregunta-respuesta en un Chatbot para consulta de
información sobre notas clínicas de diabetes
Autor(es): Zavala Díaz, Jonathan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Mascote Páramo, Jennifer; Ramos Díaz, J. Guadalupe; González Murueta, Johan Walter
La diabetes, una enfermedad con un impacto global significativo en la salud, plantea desafíos considerables en su diagnóstico y tratamiento. Este articulo aborda la necesidad de mejorar la accesibilidad a
información precisa sobre la diabetes mediante la aplicación de procesamiento de lenguaje natural (PLN) en notas clínicas. En esta investigación, los investigadores desarrollaron un Chatbot especializado
utilizando la API de ChatGPT, con el objetivo de proporcionar respuestas pertinentes a consultas relacionadas con esta enfermedad. Además, los investigadores realizaron un análisis comparativo, que incluyó
la evaluación de otros modelos de Hugging Face. Este proyecto propone una metodología para el desarrollo de un chatbot que responde preguntas sobre notas clínicas, lo cual constituye una contribución
valiosa tanto al ámbito de la salud como al desarrollo de aplicaciones mediante el procesamiento de lenguaje natural.
REVISTA: Research in Computing Science - Instituto Politécnico Nacional (pags. 21-34), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1870-4069; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://rcs.cic.ipn.mx/2024_153_8/Implementacion%20de%20modelos%20preentrenados%20de%20procesamiento%20de%20lenguaje%20natural.pdf
PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Bases de datos)
2025-02-04
Laplacian of Gaussian for Fast Cell Detection and Segmentation in Cervical Cytology to Help in Cancer Diagnosis
Autor(es): Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Chávez-Campos, Gerardo Marx
Cervical cancer remains one of the leading causes of mortality among women worldwide, and its early detection is crucial to improve survival rates. While a Pap smear is widely used as a diagnostic tool, it has
limitations in sensitivity and specificity due to the inherent subjectivity of cytological analysis. This study proposes a methodology for cervical cell segmentation and extraction based on the Laplacian of
Gaussian (LoG) algorithm, which enables the generation of regions of interest to detect and segment cells precisely in cervical cytology samples. Over 2,000 digital images of Pap smear slides were analyzed,
derived from 500 cervical cytology slides provided by the State Public Health Laboratory of Michoacán, México. The dataset results demonstrated an accuracy of 96.5%, a recall rate of 99.2%, and an F-
measure of 97.8%. Furthermore, the methodology was optimized for real-time analysis, allowing efficient segmentation and detection of cells and their morphological variations. This methodology not only
significantly improves accuracy and efficiency in cervical cell segmentation but also has a high potential for application in other experiments that require precise cell segmentation despite morphological
variations. In this regard, it offers an adaptable and versatile approach, making a substantial contribution to cytological studies and establishing itself as an effective process to extract cervical cells
automatically in real time.
REVISTA: Cureus - Springer Nature (pags. 1-19), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2168-8184; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.78519
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
2025-01-27
Evaluation and Analysis of Electrodes in Electromyography (EMG) and Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT), for Enhanced Muscle Data Capture
Autor(es): Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio;González-Vázquez, Alberto; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Robledo-Ayala, Alejandro Israel
Electromyography (EMG) and electrical impedance tomography (EIT) have seen significant advances in recent years, driven by the increasing need for efficient assessment of muscle activity in various fields,
including sports medicine, rehabilitation and neurology. Optimal electrode selection and design is crucial for reliable data acquisition as it directly impacts signal quality and noise reduction, ultimately
influencing the validity and reliability of the imaging findings for research and clinical diagnostic purposes. This study systematically compares the performance of various electrodes (types, shapes, and sizes)
in EMG and EIT systems, focusing on optimization of the signal-to-noise ratio and exploring the effects of electrode configuration on muscle signal detection. The findings of this research will inform the
development of data acquisition, streamlining the accuracy of research studies and clinical interventions, facilitating the application of devices in rehabilitation, ultimately leading to improved patient diagnostic
and assessment outcomes as well as better understanding of muscle physiology.
REVISTA: Tecnología y Ciencia Aplicada - TecNM Cenidet (pags. 446-451), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2992-8338;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/388421675_Evaluation_and_Analysis_of_Electrodes_in_Electromyography_EMG_and_Electrical_Impedance_Tomography_EIT_for_Enhanced_Muscle_Data_Capture
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Electrónica)
2024-11-30
Techani: Intelligent System for Monitoring, Tracking and Controlling records of patients with Type 1 Diabetes
Autor(es): Contreras-Jiménez, Rocio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ruíz-Tablada, Israel F.; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Gallardo-
Magaña, José A.
Diabetes Mellitus type 1 is an autoimmune disease, where the beta cells of the pancreas that produce insulin are destroyed, making it necessary for the patient to receive insulin externally. Additionally, you
should lead a healthy lifestyle: balanced diet, exercise and adequate hydration, to keep your glucose levels within the range recommended by your doctor. Currently, there have been many technological
advances for the monitoring and control of Type 1 Diabetes that allow greater accuracy and less hypoglycemia. Here we present a website and a mobile application that allow you to record the number of
carbohydrates in food, pre-prandial and post-prandial glucose, insulin applied, mood, menstrual period, hydration, exercise performed, among others, and generate reports, graphs and alerts to establish
patterns that prevent hypoglycemia and keep the patient in range for a longer time.
REVISTA: Avances en Interacción Humano-Computadora - AMEXIHC (pags. 203-208), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2594-2352; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://revistaaihc.mx/index.php/aihc/article/view/168
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
2024-11-11
From GUI to VUI: A natural language approach to multimodal medical system
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; González-Serna, Juan Gabriel; Ramos-Díaz, J. Gudalupe; Castro-Sánchez, Noe Alejandro; González-Murueta, Johan Walter
Within healthcare, the human touch between the doctor and the patient is extremely important. Unfortunately, most medical systems are based on user interfaces that make most doctors focus more on paying
attention to the screen when capturing information than on the consultation itself. This paper presents a methodology that allows converting a graphical user interface (GUI) to a voice user interface (VUI) to
automatically integrate a multimodal system. The methodology can be easily extended to other types of applications for building multimodal systems from already defined web GUIs.
REVISTA: Computación y Sistemas - IPN (pags. 1-15), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1405-5546; INDEXADO EN: JCR
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2024-11-04
Study of Machine Learning Techniques for the Estimation of Soil Moisture inAgriculture
Autor(es): Zavala-Diaz, Noel Alan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Zavala-Díaz, Jonathan; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Chávez-Campos, Gerardo; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo
Soil moisture is crucial in various fields and monitoring it to guide irrigation is challenging. Machine learning has emerged as a promising tool to predict soil moisture levels accurately. This study evaluates
machine learning techniques for this task, training models with meteorological variables and direct soil moisture measurements. Four machine learning algorithms were implemented, highlighting the Gradient
Boosting Regressor as the most effective. In addition, a processed data set that combines meteorological and soil moisture measurements is presented, hoping it will be helpful for future research. This
approach seeks to improve the compression and predictability of soil moisture, which is crucial for agricultural planning and water management in agriculture
REVISTA: International Journal of Combinatorial Optimization Problems and Informatics - EDITADA (pags. 61-71), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-1558; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://ijcopi.org/ojs/article/view/502
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Alimentos → Agricultura)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
5/29

2024-10-16
Automatic detection of lung nodules in computed tomography images using U-Net
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Calderón-Sastré, Leonardo; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo, Téllez-Anguinao, Adriana del Carmen; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro
Lung cancer is one of the leading causes of cancer-related deaths methods for lung nodules in computed tomography (CT) images rely on manual interpretation by radiologist, which can be time-consuming
and prone to human error. This paper presents BreathSafe.AI a deep learning system for the automatic detection and segmentation of lung nodules in CT images using an enhanced U-Net architecture
combined with dense network techniques. Our model is trained on the LUNA16 dataset, utilizing advanced image preprocessing and segmentation methods to optimize nodule detection. This system achieves
a diagnostic accuracy of over 90%, significantly improving detection speed and consistency compared to existing methods. The results highlight the system’s potential to enhance lung cancer screening by
reducing diagnosis time and variability, making it valuable tool for clinical use. Our approach demonstrates superior performance compared to state-of -art techniques, offering a scalable and efficient solution
for early detection of lung cancer.
REVISTA: Global Journal of Engineering and Technology Advances - Global Scholarly communication (pags. 105-114), INDIA; ISSN: 2582-5003;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://gjeta.com/content/automatic-detection-lung-nodules-computed-tomography-images-using-u-net
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2024-08-01
Detection of counterfeit images using SIFT and PNN
Autor(es): Rodríguez-Herrejón, Alejandro; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Olivares-Rojas
Manipulation of digital images presents a significant challenge, primarily due to the continuous advancement and sophistication of image enhancement tools. As a consequence, image feature extraction and
matching have become pivotal areas of research in the field of image processing. Among the various techniques developed, the Scale-Invariant Feature Transform algorithm has gained widespread recognition
for its robustness and superior performance in feature matching tasks when compared to other existing methods. In this context, our proposed method, which integrates the Scale-Invariant Feature Transform
algorithm with a probabilistic neural network, offers a novel approach to digital image classification specifically aimed at counterfeit image detection. This integrated system not only enhances the accuracy of
feature extraction but also leverages the probabilistic neural network to improve classification efficacy. Empirical results indicate that this hybrid approach achieves a remarkable relative error rate of just
0.666%, underscoring its potential as a reliable tool for combating digital image forgery. Such advancements are crucial for maintaining the integrity of digital media in various applications, from forensic
analysis to digital content authentication.
REVISTA: Global Journal of Engineering and Technology Advances - Global Scholarly Communication (pags. 171-178), ESTADOS UNIDOS; ISSN: 2582-5003; INDEXADO EN: Copernicus
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://doi.org/10.30574/gjeta.2024.20.1.0134
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2024-07-12
Real-Time Tracking and Detection of Cervical Cancer Precursor Cells: Leveraging SIFT Descriptors in Mobile Video Sequences for Enhanced Early Diagnosis
Autor(es): Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Martínez-Parrales, Ricardo
Cervical cancer ranks among the leading causes of mortality in women worldwide, underscoring the critical need for early detection to ensure patient survival. While the Pap smear test is widely used, its
effectiveness is hampered by the inherent subjectivity of cytological analysis, impacting its sensitivity and specificity. This study introduces an innovative methodology for detecting and tracking precursor
cervical cancer cells using SIFT descriptors in video sequences captured with mobile devices. More than one hundred digital images were analyzed from Papanicolaou smears provided by the State Public
Health Laboratory of Michoacán, Mexico, along with over 1800 unique examples of cervical cancer precursor cells. SIFT descriptors enabled real-time correspondence of precursor cells, yielding results
demonstrating 98.34% accuracy, 98.3% precision, 98.2% recovery rate, and an F-measure of 98.05%. These methods were meticulously optimized for real-time analysis, showcasing significant potential to
enhance the accuracy and efficiency of the Pap smear test in early cervical cancer detection.
REVISTA: Algorithms - MDPI (pags. 309-329), SUIZA; ISSN: 1999-4893; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.mdpi.com/1999-4893/17/7/309
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2024-06-07
Comparison of electrical measurements between different devices for smart meter applications
Autor(es): Medina-Molina, Jonathan Ali; Árzate-rueda, Berenice; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro; García-
Ramírez, María del Carmen
The integration of smart electrical networks aims to better respond to faults, and distribute and control energy consumption, all of this would be difficult to achieve without the functions of smart meters that
allow the sending of information between electricity companies’ services and the consumer, which is why it is important to guarantee the reliability of the information that is shared. In this work, the validation of
the EVM430-F6736 meter and the PZEM-004T sensor is carried out concerning conventional devices for measuring electrical variables such as multimeters and wattmeters. The results show the error
percentages between the measurements of the different devices.
REVISTA: Global Journal of Engineering and Technology Advances - GJETA (pags. 71-78), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2582-5003; INDEXADO EN: Copernicus
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://doi.org/10.30574/gjeta.2024.19.3.0089
PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2024-05-08
Effect of Phase Shifting on Real-Time Detection and Classification of Power Quality Disturbances
Autor(es): Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Yang, Wuqiang Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José A.; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier A.; Olivares-Rojas, Juan C.; Rico-Medina, Aldo V.
Power quality improvement and Power quality disturbance (PQD) detection are two significant concerns that must be addressed to ensure an efficient power distribution within the utility grid. When the process
to analyze PQD is migrated to real-time platforms, the possible occurrence of a phase mismatch can affect the algorithm’s accuracy; this paper evaluates phase shifting as an additional stage in signal
acquisition for detecting and classifying eight types of single power quality disturbances. According to their mathematical models, a set of disturbances was generated using an arbitrary waveform generator BK
Precision 4064. The acquisition, detection, and classification stages were embedded into a BeagleBone Black. The detection stage was performed using multiresolution analysis. The feature vectors of the
acquired signals were obtained from the combination of Shannon entropy and log-energy entropy. For classification purposes, four types of classifiers were trained: multilayer perceptron, K-nearest neighbors,
probabilistic neural network, and decision tree. The results show that incorporating a phase-shifting stage as a preprocessing stage significantly improves the classification accuracy in all cases.
REVISTA: Energies - MDPI (pags. 1-14), SUIZA; ISSN: 1996-1073; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.mdpi.com/1996-1073/17/10/2281
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2024-03-23
Clinical notes classification system for automated identification of diabetic patients: Hybrid approach integrating rules, information extraction and
machine learning
Autor(es): Zavala-Díaz, Jonathan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
Efficient medical information management is essential in today’s healthcare, significantly to automate diagnoses of chronic diseases. This study focuses on the automated identification of diabetic patients
through a clinical note classification system. This innovative approach combines rules, information extraction, and machine learning algorithms to promise greater accuracy and adaptability. Initially, the four
algorithms evaluated showed similar performance, with Gradient Boosting standing out with an accuracy of 0.999. They were tested on our clinical and oncology notes, where SVM excelled in correctly labeling
non-oncology notes with a 0.99. Gradient Boosting had the best average with 0.966. The combination of rules, information extraction, and Random Forest provided the best average performance, significantly
improving the classification of clinical notes and reducing the margin of error in identifying diabetic patients. The principal contribution of this research lies in the pioneering integration of rule-based methods,
information extraction techniques, and machine learning algorithms for enhanced accuracy in diabetic patient identification. For future work, we consider implementing these algorithms in natural clinical
settings to evaluate their practical performance. Additionally, additional approaches will be explored to improve the accuracy and applicability of clinical note-grading systems in healthcare.
REVISTA: Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems - Sage IOPress (pags. 1-11), PAÍSES BAJOS; ISSN: 1064-1246; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://doi.org/10.3233/JIFS-219375
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2023-12-31
Intrusion detection system in a hardware in the loop scenario
Autor(es): Árzate-Rueda, Berenice; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; García-Ramírez, María del Carme; Chávez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; Rodríguez-
Herrejón, Javier Alejandro
Detecting perturbation in electrical signals is crucial to assure power quality (PQ) and protect equipment connected to an electrical network. Some of the information generated by disturbances analysis can be
communicated using Internet of Things (IoT) protocols, but it is vital to verify the integrity of the data. As a result of the lack of security presented by IoT devices, the proposal of this work is based on the
implementation of an algorithm based on IDS that allows identifying attacks or failures in the security of an IoT-based PQ disturbance detection system implemented in a BeagleBone Black Wireless. The
Sparta and Sqlmap programs were used as tools to perform tests and detect security flaws in the BeagleBone, verifying essential operations of the IDS.
REVISTA: Global Journal of Engineering and Technology Advances - GJETA (pags. 36-44), ESTADOS UNIDOS; ISSN: 2582-5003; INDEXADO EN: Google Scholar
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://gjeta.com/sites/default/files/GJETA-2023-0247.pdf
PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
6/29

2023-12-31
Detección y prevención mejorada de ataques de Ransomware en Redes Empresariales
Autor(es): Ruíz-Lagunas, Juan Jesús; Antolino-Hernández, Anastacio; Ferreira-Medina, Heberto; López-Aguilar, Juan Carlos; Ramos-Díaz, J. Guadalupe; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
La falta de seguridad, y las actividades de la delincuencia conocidos como Ciberterroristas (grupos de personas que sus actividades son el atacar sistemas de información), son de los problemas más
importantes que afronta México en la post pandemia del virus COVID-19, y el mundo digital. Los sistemas de vigilancia y monitoreo automatizados, al igual que los sistemas de detección, prevención y
contención de ataques de Malware (software malicioso), son una solución que presentan muchas ventajas para garantizar la seguridad de la información en las empresas e instituciones. La intención de este
trabajo es la de proveer a las empresas mexicanas (PyMEs, Pequeñas y Medianas Empresas) de las herramientas necesarias para prevenir y detectar ataques ransomware (guía), principalmente al personal
técnico no especializado en seguridad informática. Se pretende proporcionar un conjunto de recomendaciones o buenas prácticas (actividades enfocadas a la seguridad de la información), ofrecidas a través
de una aplicación Web, y que pueden ser aplicadas a las Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones (TICs), a diferentes niveles organizacionales, con la finalidad de poder apoyar a cualquier tipo de
PyMEs sin importar su rubro o giro, ni depender de las características de su red (software o equipos especializados). Es decir, proporcionar una guía de buenas prácticas para que cualquier usuario pueda
seguir como medida de mitigación y contención de la nueva variante conocida como RaaS (Ransomware as a Service) y con el fin de prevenir y evitar problemas o incidentes de seguridad en su empresa.
REVISTA: INVESTIGACIÓN APLICADA, UN ENFOQUE EN LA TECNOLOGÍA - Zulma Sánchez Estrada (pags. 363-373), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2594-035X; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://doi.org/10.60968/iaet.3594-035X.737
PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2023-12-21
Analysis by Traveling Waves for a Protection Scheme of Transmission Lines with a UPFC
Autor(es): Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo
This paper describes a method for detecting, localizing, and classifying fault events in high voltage transmission lines with Unified Power Flow Controller compensation. The proposed approach employs a
single-end method that uses the discrete wavelet transform in combination with a probabilistic neural network. The analysis of the interaction of the UPFC with the signals of the traveling waves is presented.
The results of the error for the fault location are obtained in three different fault inception angles, three different values of fault resistance and three different compensation levels. The obtained results indicate
that the algorithm accuracy for estimating the fault distance is less than 0.7 percent of the total line length, and the classification efficiency is 95.45%. The test system is simulated in Simulink/Matlab platform
and the algorithm is implemented in Python environment.
REVISTA: IEEE LATIN AMERICA TRANSACTIONS, - IEEE (pags. 46-54), ESTADOS UNIDOS; ISSN: 1548-0992; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://latamt.ieeer9.org/index.php/transactions/article/view/8181/2195
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2023-10-01
A Cybersecurity Transaction Energy System Using Multi-Tier Blockchain
Autor(es): Juan C. Olivares-Rojas, Enrique Reyes-Archundia, Jose A. Gutierrez-Gnecchi
Cybersecurity incidents are becoming more frequent due to the high degree of penetration that information and communication technologies have in our daily lives. One of the critical infrastructures that has
benefited the most in recent years from the broad integration of technologies has been the smart grid. Smart metering systems allow, among other things, the monitoring of energy consumption and production
readings that are translated into monetary transactions. The tampering and manipulation of the smart meter readings are reflected in economic losses for the utilities and loss of confidence in the end-users.
This work presents a cybersecurity architecture based on a multitier blockchain capable of adapting to smart metering systems' architecture through an edge-fog-cloud distributed computing scheme. The
proposed architecture is highly scalable to the various components of smart metering systems and improves the performance of blockchains in aspects such as storage and processing. This blockchain uses
its own consensus algorithm proof-of-efficiency, which allows benefiting end-users through more efficient use of their energy consumption considering the power quality, the forecast of the demand, and the
support for detecting theft and energy fraud. The consensus algorithm uses the same architecture proposed to determine users' rewards through data analytics and machine learning techniques. All of this lays
the foundation for a more intelligent, more transactional, and cybersecure metering system. The architecture developed was tested to guarantee the cybersecurity of the transactions carried out in the smart
metering systems. The results obtained suggest that using a blockchain architecture allows improving the cybersecurity of smart metering systems and giving end-users greater confidence in their energy
transactions, being able to receive better economic incentives by making more efficient use of their energy consumption.
REVISTA: Computacion y Sistemas - IPN (pags. 851-867), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-9737; INDEXADO EN: JCR, CONAHCyT
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://cys.cic.ipn.mx/ojs/index.php/CyS/article/view/4071
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2023-06-27
Cyber Hygiene in Smart Metering Systems
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime
One of the fundamental components of smart cities is the smart grid characterized by various information and operational technologies that guarantee reliable and clean energy supply. For this reason, they are
a fundamental pillar for achieving sustainability in the world in which we live. Despite the enormous advantages of the smart grid, it has quite a few challenges; one that has been fundamental in recent years is
cybersecurity. The traditional approach to address cybersecurity issues generally does not consider the human factor as the main component. Recently, the concept of cyber hygiene has emerged, where the
social and human aspect is fundamental since in the same similarity with traditional hygiene, the fact of carrying out personal care practices can contribute to improving people's health, in this sense, having
better personal cybersecurity practices will allow for better cybersecurity performance of systems. This work shows the implementation of cyber hygiene in the context of smart grid, showing a methodology to
carry it out and applying it in the context of smart metering systems. The results show that the proposed method can successfully be used in the smart grid and can be applied to other contexts.
REVISTA: Computacion y Sistemas - Instituto Politécnico Nacional (pags. 459-475), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-9737; INDEXADO EN: Scopus
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://cys.cic.ipn.mx/ojs/index.php/CyS/article/view/3894
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2022-12-30
How to avoid the impact of TCSC on protection schemes
Autor(es): Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Chavez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; García-Ramírez, Maria del Carmen
Because of its undoubted advantages, the Thyristor Controlled Series Capacitor (TCSC) is one of the most widely used power-electronic controllers in power systems. However, the TCSC has also been a
cause of concern in protective relaying because of its impact on the impedance seen by conventional distance relays, which may lead to an incorrect assessment of fault distance and, consequently, an
erroneous relay tripping. To overcome these difficulties, this paper proposes using schemes based on traveling waves for protecting TCSC series compensated transmission lines. Since the method avoids
using impedance-based techniques, it is not prone to under-reach or over-reach problems, among others. The approach is based on traveling wave analysis using the discrete wavelet transform. The different
case studies show the effectiveness and accuracy of the proposed algorithm in a TCSC environment.
REVISTA: Global Journal of Engineering and Technology Advances - GSC Online Press (pags. 53-55), INDIA; ISSN: 2582-5003; INDEXADO EN: DOAJ
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://gjeta.com/content/how-avoid-impact-tcsc-protection-schemes
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2022-12-26
Evaluation of wavelet-based feature extraction methods for detection and classification of power quality disturbances
Autor(es): Rico-Medina, Aldo Vinicio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, Jose Antonio; Chavez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Garcia-Ramirez, Maria del Caremn
The appearance of Power Quality Disturbances can cause serious damage to the utility grid. Their detection and identification are two of the major problems related to the improvement of Power Quality. This
paper presents an evaluation of different combinations of wavelet-based features for the detection and classification of eight types of Single Power Quality Disturbances. A set of disturbances was generated in
MATLAB through their mathematical models. The detection stage was performed using Multiresolution Analysis. The extracted features were normalized by Z-score to serve as input to four different classifiers:
Multilayer Perceptron, K-Nearest Neighbors, Probabilistic Neural Network, and Decision Tree. The combination of Shannon Entropy and Log-Energy Entropy was found the best with the highest accuracy in all
cases. Furthermore, the normalization stage has an impact on classification as it improves accuracy regardless of the classifier used. This fact makes it possible to reduce the computational expense by using
only two types of features without compromising the accuracy.
REVISTA: World Journal of Advanced Engineering Technology and Sciences - Magna Scientia (pags. 220-229), INDIA; ISSN: 2582-8266; INDEXADO EN: DOAJ
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://wjaets.com/content/evaluation-wavelet-based-feature-extraction-methods-detection-and-classification-power
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2022-11-18
Dialog modeling of domain specific cognitive assistants
Autor(es): Diaz-Ramos, J. Guadalupe; Ruíz-Lagunas, Juan Jesús; Núñez-Vieyra, Adrián; Cuin-Jacuinde, José Manuel; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Intelligent virtual assistants of software are becoming morecommon. Frequently, the communication interface is dialoguewhich is expressed in natural language. When an assistant consistsof questions that are
associated with a single answer, the abstractionof the dialogue is straightforward, however, when there areconversations with multiple bifurcations in the flow ofcommunication, the representation and
documentation is complex.In this sense, there is a lack of formalities that allow a dialogue tobe accurately represented and, based on them, to proceed with itsprogramming in an industrial framework.In this
work we propose the use of finite state machines to modelcomplex dialogues. Thus, we introduce a formal model for therepresentation of dialogue and its mapping to a real assistant, usingan industrial
framework. We believe that our approach will make iteasier to design and to program assistants with complex interaction,enabling better adoption of them.
REVISTA: Avances en Interracción Humano Computadora - Asociacion Mexicana de Interacción Humano Computadora (pags. 1-5), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2594-2352; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366863903_Dialog_modeling_of_domain_specific_cognitive_assistants
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
7/29

PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
2022-11-18
Arquitectura para Acceso a Datos Abiertos Públicos Mediante Software Intermediario y Asistente Virtual
Autor(es): Ramos-Díaz, J. Guadalupe; Núñez-Vieyra, Adrián; Ruíz-Lagunas, Juan Jesús; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Los datos abiertos constituyen un medio para que los gobiernos puedan publicar información acerca de su ejercicio, en los que la transparencia de la información es indispensable. Históricamente los datos
abiertos se han puesto a disposición a través de formatos planos o semi estructurados (por ejemplo, empleando lenguajes de la Web Semántica, e.g., RDF, OWL, SPARQL). Para poder acceder e interpretar
la información publicada se requiere el conocimiento de un lenguaje de consulta formal, lo que ha traído como consecuencia un bajo consumo ya que un ciudadano no posee el entrenamiento técnico para
plantear consultas. En este trabajo en progreso, presentamos una arquitectura compuesta por un asistente virtual que recibe consultas de ciudadanos expresadas en lenguaje natural; el asistente las envía a
servicios web localizados en la nube, que a su vez, llevan a cabo las consultas semánticas, obteniendo respuestas y regresándolas al ciudadano. También referimos la infraestructura técnica que se está
empleando para desplegar el prototipo.
REVISTA: Jornadas de Ciencia y Tecnología Aplicada - Centro Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo Tecnológico (pags. 1-5), MÉXICO; ;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366860538_Arquitectura_para_Acceso_a_Datos_Abiertos_Publicos_Mediante_Software_Intermediario_y_Asistente_Virtual
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2022-10-30
Cybersecurity on Transactions in Smart Metering Systems Using Blockchain
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
The Smart Metering Systems (SMS) allow the final-user, real-time monitoring of their energy consumption through Smart Meter (SM). The SM measures the energy consumption and energy production, and
reports this data to the utilities. Also, SMS allows the automatic connection and disconnection, demand-response events and dynamic electrical price according to offer and demand [1]. The most implemented
SMS is the Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) [2]. Despite the enormous advantages of SMS, it has a lot of challenges and opportunities; one of them, it is related with the data cybersecurity. There are a
lot of threats on cyber security in SMS: the interruption of the measurement (disconnection of the meter, deletion of the event log), investment of the meter (for less consumption data record), the deletion of
records, the alteration of stored data, the interruption of communications to prevent data from being reported, the tamper of consumption data "on the fly" when they are reported, as well as the injection of false
information (for example, alteration of dynamic energy prices), and the retransmission of packets (duplicate packets), among others [3]. On the other hand, SMS is not used actually for data analytic
applications inside of SMs. The data reported by the SMs could be used for diverse applications such as fraud energy prevent, power quality prediction, fault detection, among others. 2 Previous work in the
area The main security mechanisms implemented to solve this problem lie in the use of cryptographic techniques [4]. Other techniques used are digital signature schemes and public-key schemes (PKI),
Preventing and Intrusive Detection Systems (IPS and IDS), among others [5]. Recently, blockchain techniques (Blockchains) have been used because it is the combination of multiple cybersecurity techniques
[6]. On the other hand, there are works related to data analytics, machine learning, and artificial intelligence with data in SMS [7] and [8], in specific fields such as energy thief [9]. The most related works are
presented in [9-15].
REVISTA: Research in Computing Science - Instituto Politécnico Nacional (pags. 1-4), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1870-4059; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366856003_Cybersecurity_on_Transactions_in_Smart_Metering_Systems_Using_Blockchain
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2022-09-29
Architecture for Digital Twins in Agrovoltaics Systems
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Yang, Wuqiang; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; González-Serna, Juan Gabriel;
Digital twins are a technology growing widely today because it can map the physical world with the virtual world, which makes it an attractive solution for the development of cyber-physical systems. Within the
cyber-physical systems, agrovoltaic systems are the combination of renewable energy systems with monitoring and control systems for soil and climatic variables focused on controlling resources such as the
optimization of the use of water and fertilizers. This type of system has generally been developed without a strict software engineering approach. This work presents the development of a general architecture
for the development of digital systems applied in various contexts, especially in agrovoltaic systems.
REVISTA: Research in Computing Science - Instituto Politécnico Nacional (pags. 1-7), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1870-4059; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366850145_Architecture_for_Digital_Twins_in_Agrovoltaics_Systems
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Alimentos → Agricultura)
2022-07-13
Sistema de Ingesta de Datos Aplicando Modelos Pull y Push en el Área de la Salud
Autor(es): Melchor-Uceda, Iran Aranne; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Ramos-Diaz, J. Guadalupe
Con la apertura de la revolución industrial 4.0 en materia de salud, las tecnologías de la información y comunicación (TIC’s) que se utilizan día con día se encuentran en constante evolución y mejora ha tal
grado de sustituir procesos de forma manual por procesos completamente automatizados a fin de erradicar enfoques tradicionales y obsoletos. En este trabajo se muestra el modelo de un sistema de ingesta
de datos para dispositivos médicos, sensores y dispositivos usables para extraer los datos en crudo de dichos dispositivos a través de la aplicación de dos herramientas tecnológicas de gran impacto y
relevancia: las tecnologías pull y push. El modelo propuesto se encarga de la extracción, procesamiento y almacenamiento de los datos a través de una aplicación Web que permite visualizar los datos e
información de salud proveniente de estudios de electrocardiografía de 3 y 12 derivaciones, un reloj inteligente Huawei Watch Fit y una báscula inteligente, para posteriormente almacenar la información en un
lago de datos, con el propósito de poder combinar y homogeneizar los datos en un mismo formato. Dicha homogenización facilitará el análisis y estudio de los datos para su posterior procesamiento
permitiendo innovar dentro del área de la salud.
REVISTA: Jornada de Ciencia y Tecnología Aplicada - Tecnológico Nacional de México / CENIDET (pags. 42-47), MÉXICO; ;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://jcyta.cenidet.tecnm.mx/revistas/jcyta/08-Revista_JCyTA_Vol-5-Num-1_Ene-Jun_2022.pdf
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Bases de datos)
2022-03-15
Analysis and comparison of image processing and artificial intelligence algorithms to detect AFB in pulmonary tuberculosis images
Autor(es): Díaz-Huerta, Jorge Luis; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Arellano-Calderón, Sergio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
ulmonary tuberculosis (TB) is one of the top 10 causes of death worldwide caused by an infection. TB is curable with an adequate diagnosis, normally performed through bacilloscopies. Automate TB diagnosis
implies bacilli detection and counting usually based on smear images processing and artificial intelligence. Works reported in the literature usually consider images with similar coloring characteristics, which
are difficult to obtain due to the Ziehl - Neelsen staining method variations (excess or deficiency of coloration), provoking errors in the bacilli segmentation. This paper presents an image preprocessing
technique, based on simple, fast and well-known processing techniques, to improve and standardize the contrast in the Acid-Fast Bacilli (AFB) images used to diagnose TB; these techniques are used
previously to the segmentation stage to obtain accurate results. The results are validated with and without the preprocessing stage by the Jaccard index, pixel detection accuracy and UAC obtained in an
Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and a Bayesian classifier with Gaussian mixture model (GMM). Obtained results indicate that the proposed approach can be applied to automate the Tuberculosis diagnostic.
REVISTA: Tuberculosis - Elsevier (pags. 1-12), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1472-9792; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tube.2022.102196
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Procesamiento de señales)
2022-01-03
UNA METODOLOGÍA PARA LA CIBER HIGIENE EN REDES ELÉCTRICAS INTELIGENTES
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo
Aunque las redes eléctricas inteligentes ofrecen múltiples ventajas sobre las redes tradicionales, aún existen desafíos que superar para garantizar la calidad del servicio y la seguridad de la red. En particular,
la ciberseguridad juega un papel esencial para garantizar la confiabilidad del funcionamiento de la red y la resistencia a las amenazas externas. El enfoque tradicional para abordar los problemas de seguridad
cibernética generalmente no considera el factor humano como el componente principal. Recientemente ha surgido el concepto de ciberseguridad, donde los aspectos sociales y humanos son fundamentales
para reducir las vulnerabilidades y el riesgo de ataques y brechas. De manera similar a la higiene personal, que influye en gran medida en la salud de las personas, considerando el factor humano (es decir, el
comportamiento humano, la conciencia y la capacitación) como un componente crítico de ciberseguridad, puede mejorar significativamente las prácticas de ciberseguridad de los operadores humanos que a
su vez pueden resultar en una mejora de la ciberseguridad actuación. En este artículo, los autores proponen y prueban una metodología para implementar prácticas de higiene cibernética en el contexto de
los sistemas de red eléctrica inteligente, centrada en los sistemas de medición inteligente. Los resultados sugieren que la implementación de prácticas de higiene cibernética puede mejorar la ciberseguridad
de los medidores inteligentes y ser adecuada para implementar otros componentes sensibles de Smart Grid.
REVISTA: Dyna Ingeniería e Industria - dyna (pags. 1-11), ESPAÑA; ISSN: 0012-7361; INDEXADO EN: JCR
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
2021-10-28
A VAR model to forecast electricity consumption in Smart Metering System using an edge-fog-cloud architecture
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, Jose Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Tellez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime
The increasing hardware capabilities of embedded devices used in smart meters and other smart grid devices allow the implementation of new applications for the utilities and end-users using electrical data.
This work shows the implementation of a VAR model to forecasting electricity consumption using weather data across the smart metering system infrastructure. This platform considers an edge-fog-cloud
architecture for consumption prediction using a time-series approach. The results show that using weather data across edge-fog-cloud architecture in smart metering systems could improve forecasting
electricity consumption accuracy.
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
8/29

REVISTA: Research in Computing Science - Instituto Politecnico Nacional (pags. 1-7), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1870-4069; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/366845402_A_VAR_model_to_forecast_electricity_consumption_in_Smart_Metering_System_using_an_edge-fog-cloud_architecture
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2021-04-14
A Transactive Energy Model for Smart Metering Systems using Blockchain
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo
Artículo JCR
REVISTA: CSEE Journal of Power Energy Systems - IEEE (pags. 1-9), ESTADOS UNIDOS; ISSN: 2096-0042; INDEXADO EN: JCR
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2021-03-03
Towards Cybersecurity of the Smart Grid using Digital Twins
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo
The proliferation of cyber-physical systems is bringing with it the growing need to link these systems with virtual environments. Particularly in the smart grid, the high costs of some devices and especially the
imminent need to not be able to manipulate these devices in production environments make necessary mechanisms that allow the manipulation of these physical objects in virtual environments; this has been
called a digital twin. On the other hand, cyberattacks are growing in all cyber-physical systems, and in the smart grid, cybersecurity is essential due to the smart grid is a critical infrastructure. This work shows
a small implementation of a digital twin system for smart metering systems in a smart home environment for testing cybersecurity issues. The results show that the use of digital twins is feasible in various
contexts of the smart grid in particularly in cybersecurity testing
REVISTA: IEEE Internet Computing - IEEE (pags. 1-6), ESTADOS UNIDOS; ISSN: 0272-1716; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9368968
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2021-02-08
Smart metering system data analytics platform using multicore edge computing
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime
The smart grid revolution has only been possible, thanks to the development and proliferation of smart meters. The increasingly growing computing capabilities for Internet of Things devices have made it
possible for data to be processed directly from the devices where it is produced; this has been called edge computing. Edge computing is allowing the smart grid to become increasingly intelligent to solve
problems that make electricity consumption more efficient and environmentally friendly. This work presents the implementation of a smart metering system that allows data analytics using a multiprocessing
architecture directly on the smart meter. The results show that the development of smart meters with data analytics capabilities at the edge is a reality today, and the use of multiprocessing permits the
improvement of data processing.
REVISTA: International Journal of Reconfigurable and Embedded Systems - Institute of Advanced Engineering and Science (pags. 11-17), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2089-4864;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://ijres.iaescore.com/index.php/IJRES/article/view/20308
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2020-11-30
Towards human-computer interaction on smart metering systems
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Ramos-Diaz, J. Guadalupe; González-Serna, Juan Gabriel
New technologies associated with the fourth industrial revolution are transforming the world in which we live, and the power grid is no exception since it has been provided with intelligence. One of its best-
known applications is smart metering systems that allow real-time energy consumption/production to be known, as well as other benefits such as outages and reconnections automatically. The new generations
of smart meters have more computing capacity allowing new applications. This work shows some considerations in the design of smart meters using human-computer interaction techniques. The results aim to
improve the end-user’s experience and satisfaction and can help to mitigate the reluctance to use smart metering systems in Mexico.
REVISTA: Avances en Interacción Humano-Computadora - Asociación Mexicana de Interacción Humano Computadora (pags. 90-93), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2594-2352;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://aihc.amexihc.org/index.php/aihc/article/view/58
PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2020-10-08
A SURVEY ON SMART METERING SYSTEMS USING HUMAN-COMPUTER INTERACTION
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Ramos-Díaz, J. Guadalupe; González-Serna, Juan Gabriel
Las nuevas tecnologías asociadas con la cuarta revolución industrial están transformando el mundo en el que vivimos y la red eléctrica no es la excepción ya que ha sido provista con inteligencia. Una de las
aplicaciones mejor conocida son los sistemas de medición inteligente, los cuales permiten medir en tiempo real el consumo/producción de energía, así como otros beneficios tales como cortes y reconexiones
de forma automática. Las nuevas generaciones de medidores inteligentes tienen mayores capacidades de cómputo permitiendo nuevas aplicaciones. Este trabajo muestra el diseño tanto de hardware como
de software para medidores inteligentes usando técnicas de interacción humano-computadora. Los resultados muestran que son alentadores para los usuarios finales que suelen retraerse de utilizarlos.
REVISTA: Revista Electro - TecNM / I.T. de Chihuahua (pags. 72-76), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1405-2172; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://electro.itchihuahua.edu.mx/
PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2020-09-21
Experimental Study of Electrical Properties of Pharmaceutical Materials by Electrical Impedance Spectroscopy
Autor(es): Vazquez-Nambo, Manuel; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Yang, Wuqiang; Rodríguez-Frías, Marco Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Lorias-Espinoza, Daniel
The physicochemical characterization of pharmaceutical materials is essential for drug discovery, development and evaluation, and for understanding and predicting their interaction with physiological systems.
Amongst many measurement techniques for spectroscopic characterization of pharmaceutical materials, Electrical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS) is powerful as it can be used to model the electrical properties
of pure substances and compounds in correlation with specific chemical composition. In particular, the accurate measurement of specific properties of drugs is important for evaluating physiological interaction.
The electrochemical modelling of compounds is usually carried out using spectral impedance data over a wide frequency range, to fit a predetermined model of an equivalent electrochemical cell. This paper
presents experimental results by EIS analysis of four drug formulations (trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole C14H18N4O3-C10H11N3O3, ambroxol C13H18Br2N2O.HCl, metamizole sodium C13H16N3NaO4S,
and ranitidine C13H22N4O3S.HCl). A wide frequency range from 20 Hz to 30 MHz is used to evaluate system identification techniques using EIS data and to obtain process models. The results suggest that
arrays of linear R-C models derived using system identification techniques in the frequency domain can be used to identify different compounds.
REVISTA: MDPI Applied Sciences - MDPI (pags. 1-19), SUIZA; ISSN: 2076-3417; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/10/18/6576
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2020-05-15
Análisis de datos locales como alternativa para disminuir la sobreproducción eléctrica en México
Autor(es): Alemán-Duarte, Marisol; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Lara-Hernández, Rafael
En México el organismo que se encarga de estudiar y pronosticar la demanda energética es el Centro Nacional de Control de Energía (CENACE). Mensualmente el CENACE genera reportes de pronóstico de
la demanda máxima integrada (DMI), para regular la cantidad de la energía generada. La DMI representa el nivel más alto de consumo eléctrico por región. Estas mediciones no son sensibles a cambios a
corto plazo, por lo que no es posible reaccionar a cambios rápidos y focalizados, teniendo que generar una sobreproducción para evitar el desabasto: llamado reserva operativa. La reserva operativa no
presenta tendencia a disminuir. En el presente trabajo se propone analizar los métodos actuales elaborados por el CENACE y estudiar las variables de consumo locales, que debieran ser incluidas en
modelos de pronóstico más complejos que permitan a la compañía generadora de energía reaccionar de manera oportuna a los cambios en la demanda de energía eléctrica
REVISTA: Academia Journals Morelia - Academia Journals (pags. 47-51), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1946-5351; INDEXADO EN: EBSCO
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2020-04-27
UNA REVISIÓN A LA CIBER SEGURIDAD EN REDES ELÉCTRICAS INTELIGENTES (A REVIEW OF CYBER SECURITY ON SMART GRIDS)
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnechi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime
La Transformación Digital a través de las Tecnologías de las Cuarta Revolución Industrial han incidido de buena forma en prácticamente todas las actividades humanas y la red eléctrica no es la excepción. La
Red Eléctrica es la responsable de brindar energía eléctrica a todos los procesos humanos y vivir sin ella es prácticamente imposible. La inclusión de tecnologías de información y operación (IT y OT) a la red
eléctrica le han dado cierta “inteligencia” para brindar nuevos servicios a los usuarios finales y a las empresas eléctricas, tales como: medición de consumo y facturación en tiempo casi real, cortes y
reconexiones de forma automática, monitoreo de la calidad de la energía, programas de respuestas a la demanda, detección de falla, entre otras. A pesar de estas nuevas ventajas, el uso de IT y OT con lleva
varias ventajas, entre las más importantes: los costos, el gran volumen de datos generados y sobre todo la seguridad de la información en todos los procesos de la red eléctrica inteligente. Este trabajo
presenta una revisión al estado del arte actual respecto al tema de ciber seguridad en las redes eléctricas inteligentes de la siguiente manera: en la sección de Introducción se muestra los conceptos básicos
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
9/29

de ciber seguridad en redes eléctricas inteligentes. En el capítulo de métodos se muestras los trabajos relacionados que pretenden dar solución a la problemática planteada. En la sección de resultados se
realiza una tabla comparativa entre los principales trabajos. Posteriormente se discuten los resultados y se llegan a conclusiones.
REVISTA: Pistas Educativas - Instituto Tecnológico e Celaya (pags. 1-13), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2448-847X; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://www.itcelaya.edu.mx/ojs/index.php/pistas/article/view/2261/1783
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2019-12-21
Data Analytics of Electromagnetics Field Measurements in Smart Meters
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Díaz-Huerta, Jorge Luis; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriada del Carmen; González-Murueta,
Johan Walter
The smart meters are considered the main component of the smart grid allowing communication and processing of electrical energy measurement data to utilities. Nowadays, there is a great concern that
smart meters' data which is communicated mainly by wireless or wired communication means produce electromagnetic fields which be harmful to human health. In this work, a study of data analytics is
presented on the readings produced by the smart meters made with statistical and machine learning probabilistic techniques in order to compare the data with reference values and determine if they are
harmful or not for the human health.
REVISTA: IJCOPI - EDITADA (pags. 39-45), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-1558; INDEXADO EN: WoS Emerging
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://ijcopi.org/index.php/ojs/article/view/165
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2019-12-20
Propuesta de Mercado Eléctrico Minorista Transactivo en México
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Carrillo-Vllanueva, Sergio Adrián; Gutiérrez-Gne
El abaratamiento de las energías renovables aunado al amplio uso de tecnologías de información y comunicaciones en la red eléctrica, entre otros factores han hecho que los mercados eléctricos
principalmente en el sector minorista entre los usuarios finales estén cambiando de forma muy dinámica. En este trabajo se presenta un estudio de las diversas alternativas de mercados eléctricos minoristas
transactivos y se propone un modelo mercado eléctrico simple con estas características adaptado para el entorno de los usuarios finales mexicanos.
REVISTA: Identidad Energética - CINERGIAUG (pags. 11-17), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2448-7775;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://cinergiaug.org/Revista/RIE_VII_N1_Dic2019_.pdf
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2019-12-07
PROPUESTA DE FLEXIBILIDAD CURRICULAR EN EL TECNOLÓGICO NACIONAL DE MÉXICO
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Calderón, Francisco
Con la llegada de la cuarta revolución industrial, los trabajos que hoy en día se requieren y en el futuro inmediato se requerirán, no cuentan con personas capacitadas para ello, esto se debe entre otros
factores, a que los planes y programas de estudio no son del todo flexibles. En este trabajo se presenta una propuesta de cómo estructurar el currículo de la oferta educativa a nivel pregrado y posgrado del
Tecnológico Nacional de México (TecNM) para que este sea sumamente flexible, acorde con los nuevos retos del entorno, y a su vez adaptable a las nuevas generaciones de alumnos que ingresan al nivel
superior.
REVISTA: ANFEI Digital - ANFEI (pags. 1-11), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2395-9878;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://www.anfei.org.mx/revista/index.php/revista/article/view/529
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2019-11-15
A Novel Multitier Blockchain Architecture to Protect Data in Smart Metering Systems
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime; González-Murrueta, Johan Walter
Smart metering is among the most important current and future trends in smart grid development. Utility companies spearheading the smart meter revolution claim many benefits for the end-user. One of the
key information technology solutions applied to smart meters is ensuring data protection and cybersecurity. Nowadays, the data tampering in smart meters is a big issue for the utilities and end-users. In
particular, the advent of secure monetary transactions has inspired the diversification of blockchains as means to provide cybersecurity and encourage end-user trust. The blockchain technology has some
issues such as storage and processing, which are necessary to improve for getting better performance in smart metering systems. Here, the authors propose a novel cybersecurity architecture for smart
metering systems, based on blockchains to significantly enhance data security. The proposed architecture is divided into multiple tiers directed toward improving performance based on a scheme of edge, fog,
and cloud computing. Besides, the authors present an optimized consensus algorithm for smart meters called proof-of-efficiency. The results show that the proposed architecture implemented can effectively
improve cybersecurity and data protection for smart metering applications.
REVISTA: IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management - IEEE (pags. 1-14), ESTADOS UNIDOS; ISSN: 0018-9391; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8902082
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2019-11-12
A Multi-Tier Architecture for Data Analytics in Smart Metering Systems
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; González-Murrueta, Johan Walter; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime
With the proliferation of smart meters in smart grids, new challenges have emerged in the energy sector and applications are continuously developed, mainly concerning data analytics to address those
challenges. Traditionally, data analytics in smart grid systems is performed in server-side tier; however, it is necessary to process data analytics close to the smart meter to achieve better performance. In order
to process data effectively, it is also necessary to implement methodologies to facilitate the integration of data analysis processes in the Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI). This paper presents a novel
architecture for data analytics in Smart Metering Systems based on an edge-fog-cloud computing architecture that permits different types of data analytics in a multi-tier context. The proposed architecture has
the capability of learning and adapting to different contexts in smart metering systems using a reinforcement learning approach. The architecture was tested with three different analytic applications: forecasting
energy consumption, prediction of power quality and prediction of energy theft. The results indicate that the methodology can be feasible solution for direct implementation in Smart Metering Systems.
REVISTA: Simulation Modelling Theory and Practice - Elsevier (pags. 1-13), PAÍSES BAJOS; ISSN: 1569-190X; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1569190X19301558
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2019-09-13
Analítica de datos para pronóstico de robo de energía usando medidores inteligentes
Autor(es): Loya-Ayala, Yazmín Monserrat; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Mendieta-Jiménez, Ana Lilia; Jasso-Carbajal, Maria Cristhina
El robo de energía es la principal pérdida no técnica de las empresas suministradoras del servicio eléctrico. Con la introducción de medidores inteligentes se registran las lecturas de medición del consumo y
producción de energía eléctrica de forma más periódica, lo cual conlleva al posterior uso de esta información. En este trabajo se presenta la analítica de datos de las lecturas de consumo/producción de
energía eléctrica de medidores inteligentes que permite determinar un patrón de consumo/producción de energía eléctrica para identificar si los consumos/producción de energía eléctrica pueden ser
considerados como robo de energía.
REVISTA: Journal CIM - Instituto Tecnológico de Orizaba (pags. 1-8), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-8102; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.cim-tecnm.com/articulos
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2019-08-31
Analítica de datos en simulador de redes para sistemas de medición inteligente
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; González-Murueta, Johan Walter; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriada del Carmen; Cerda-JAcobo, Jaime
La Red Eléctrica Inteligente es uno de los pilares fundamentales de la Transformación Digital producida por la cuarta revolución industrial. Muchos de los problemas de la red eléctrica inteligente como los
sistemas de medición inteligente no pueden modelarse a través de pruebas reales de laboratorio debido a la densidad de componentes utilizados; para ello, es necesario utilizar simuladores de redes
eléctricas. La gran mayoría de los simuladores de redes eléctricas no cuentan con muchas capacidades de comunicación a redes de datos ni permiten realizar analítica de datos. Este trabajo presenta la
adecuación del simulador de redes PacketTracer para permitir el manejo de analítica de datos en sistemas de medición inteligente.
REVISTA: Research in Computing Science - IPN (pags. 243-251), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1870-4069; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.rcs.cic.ipn.mx/2019_148_8/Analitica%20de%20datos%20en%20simulador%20de%20redes%20para%20sistemas%20de%20medicion%20inteligente.pdf
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2019-07-17
Usabilidad y experiencia de usuario en un portal de un sistema de medición inteligente
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Noriega-Carmona, José Alfredo; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
10/29

Con el amplio uso de las tecnologías de información y comunicaciones en la operación de la red eléctrica, tanto el usuario final como la empresa eléctrica pueden ser beneficiados al contar con un sistema de
medición en tiempo real del consumo/producción de energía eléctrica a través de un portal Web o aplicación móvil, entre otras funcionalidades. El presente trabajo muestra los resultados de aplicar técnicas
de usabilidad y experiencia del usuario en el desarrollo de una aplicación Web que permita monitorear funcionalidades de un sistema de medición inteligente.
REVISTA: Revista de la Alta Tecnología y Sociedad - Academia Journals (pags. 9-17), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1940-2171; INDEXADO EN: EBSCO
PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
2019-07-15
Management of digital documents with encrypted signature, through the use of centralized PKI, and distributed using blockchain for a secure exchange
Autor(es): Antolino-Hernandez, Anastacio; Ferreira-Medina, Heberto, Torres-Millarez, Cristhian; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
The project explores the use of digital documents as a response to the problems presented by physical documents, since they are at risk of partial or total loss. The solution is the digitalization that plays a very
important role in society and the contemporary world. This helps sustainability and the preservation of natural resources. The security of the archives is a necessity that requires as solution to use the
technology of public key infrastructure (PKI) to generate a digital document, besides registering the public and private keys of the personnel that has the legal power to sign them. These documents are stored
on an official server and distributed among the registered hosts of the network. This certificate will help to detect changes in an unauthorized way, when comparing the document with the original. In this phase
of distributed verification, the Blockchain technology will be used. Then the proposal is to build a tool to generate digital documents, in addition to managing public keys, transaction logs and records. The use of
Blockchain will allow to establish and configure a Peer to Peer (P2P) network for a secure exchange.
REVISTA: Journal of Research and Development - Ecorfan (pags. 26-37), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2444-4987; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://www.ecorfan.org/spain/researchjournals/Investigacion_y_Desarrollo/vol5num15/Journal_of_Research_and_Development_V5_N15_3.pdf
PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
2019-05-17
Diseño de una arquitectura de pre-procesamiento de datos en medidores inteligentes para pruebas y entrenamiento de algoritmos de inteligencia de datos
Autor(es): Reyes-González, Jorge Luis; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; González-Murueta, Johan Walter
La generación de grandes volúmenes de datos por los dispositivos inteligentes hoy en día representa un reto importante para la obtención de información valiosa sobre patrones y tendencias en el
comportamiento de sistemas complejos gracias a las nuevas técnicas de análisis de datos mediante inteligencia artificial. En éste trabajo se presenta una propuesta de arquitectura para el pre-procesamiento
de datos de variables eléctricas en medidores inteligentes, adecuada para su análisis con algoritmos de inteligencia artificial orientados a la clasificación de fenómenos de calidad de la energía.
REVISTA: Academia Journals Morelia 2019 - Academia Journal (pags. 2379-2384), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1946-5351; INDEXADO EN: EBSCO
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2019-02-14
Aplicación de Técnicas de UX en el Desarrollo de un Portal de un Sistema de Medición Inteligente
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Noriega-Carmona, José Alfredo, Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
Con la llegada de los medidores inteligentes la operación de la red eléctrica ha sido beneficiada tanto para la empresa eléctrica como para el usuario final al dotar de un sistema de medición en tiempo real de
consumo/producción de energía eléctrica, así como otras características funcionales como cortes y reconexiones de energía de forma automática. El presente trabajo muestra los resultados de la aplicación
de técnicas de Experiencia del Usuario (UX) para el desarrollo de una aplicación Web que permita monitorear los consumos/producciones de energía, así como sus costos asociados entre otras
funcionalidades.
REVISTA: Academia Journals Tepic 2019 - Academia Journals (pags. 1026-1031), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1946-5351 Vol; INDEXADO EN: EBSCO
PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2018-07-01
Is the Blockchain a good solution for Cybersecurity in the Smart Grid?
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Tellez-Anguiano, Adriana
This work focuses on showing all the advantages and disadvantages of using blockchain as a cybersecurity mechanism in all the parts that make up the smart grid. The use of blockchain as a security
mechanism in the smart grid will be extended in the comming years guaranteing trust among users and utilities
REVISTA: IEEE Smart Grid Newsletter - IEEE (pags. 10-13), ESTADOS UNIDOS; ;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://smartgrid.ieee.org/newsletters/july-2018/is-the-blockchain-a-good-solution-for-cybersecurity-in-the-smart-grid
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2017-11-08
The teaching-learning of Graph Theory with the support of Learn Graph-Ware software
Autor(es): Jiménez-Murillo, José Alfredo; Ortiz-Ortiz, Octavio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Jiménez-Hernández, Paola; Jiménez-Hernández, Eréndira Miriam
The software named “Learn Graph-Ware” was developed, it has used as additional support for the subject of Discrete Mathematics in the unit concerning Graph Theory on the Computational Systems
Engineering degree at the Technological Institute of Morelia, Mexico. The results obtained show that the progress made by the students in the experimental group, who used Learn Graph-Ware as additional
support in their classes, was significantly better than that made by the students in the control group, who did not use it.
REVISTA: ROPEC 2017 - IEEE (pags. 1-6), ESTADOS UNIDOS; ISSN: 2573-0770; INDEXADO EN: SCOPUS
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8261570
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2016-10-24
Análisis de Algoritmos y Protocolos de Comunicación en Dispositivos Smart Meters (Medidores Inteligentes)
Autor(es): Aranda, Manuel; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Valdes, A. Gladys; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique ; Correa-Gómez, Javier
REVISTA: Journal CIM - Instituto Tecnológico de Orizaba (pags. 472-489), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-8102; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://www.cim-tecnm.com/
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2015-11-18
Desarrollo de una Aplicación para Fortalecer el Aprendizaje de los Fundamentos de Programación
Autor(es): Olivares.Rojas, Juan Carlos; Jiménez-Murillo, José Alfredo; Ortiz-Ortiz, Octavio Salud; Rodriguez-Maya, Noel Enrique
Por aparecer la versión final (ya está publicado solo falta que la suban a Internet)
REVISTA: Revista de Ciencia y Tecnología del ITESCO - IEEE-ITESCO (pags. 1-5), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2395-907X;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://www.itesco.edu.mx/Web/index.php/oferta-educativa/escolarizado/electrica/1261
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2015-10-24
Desarrollo de una Aplicación para Fortalecer el Aprendizaje de los Fundamentos de Programación
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Jimenez-Murillo, José Alfredo; Ortiz-Ortiz, Octavio Salud; Rodriguez-Maya, Noel Enrique
REVISTA: Revista de Ciencia y Tecnologia del Instituto Tecnológico Superior de Coatzacoalcos - AMITE 2015 (pags. 1-8), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2395-907X;
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
2015-10-15
Hacia la comparaci´on precisa de productos a partir de fuentes de datos distintas en la Web
Autor(es): Ramos-Díaz, José Gudalupe; Solis, Ricardo A.; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Moctezuma, Luis Alfredo ; Carrillo, Maya
Cuando un consumidor desea comprar un producto v´ıa comercio electr´onico, es com´un que enfoque sus esfuerzos en localizar la tienda con el mejor precio y con las caracter´ısticas concretas de su inter
´es. Desafortunadamente la mayor´ıa de las tiendas emplean un cat´alogo propio de productos y atributos lo que impide elaborar reportes autom´aticos de productos de proveedores diversos. En este trabajo
hacemos una revisi´on de la forma en que se ha atendido el problema de la comparaci´on de precios, enseguida caracterizamos algunos sitios de comercio para conocer c´omo buscan resolver la comparaci
´on. Despu´es presentamos un modelo de organizaci´on de informaci´on basado en la Web Sem´antica para posibilitar el dise˜no de reportes de productos y atributos de diferentes proveedores y detallamos
los diferentes roles que pueden asumir los componentes del modelo. La elaboraci´on de reportes precisos puede favorecer la mejor decisi´on de compra de los clientes e incorporar de manera masiva a
negocios diversos a la necesaria comparaci´on de ofertantes.
REVISTA: Research in Computer Science - IPN (pags. 83-93), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1870-4069; INDEXADO EN: LATINDEX, DBLP
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://rcs.cic.ipn.mx/rcs/2015_99/
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2015-09-24
PROTOTIPO PARA LA GENERACIÓN AUTOMÁTICA DE HORARIOS ACADÉMICOS EN EL INSTITUTO TECNOLÓGICO DEL VALLE DE MORELIA
Autor(es): Rodriguez-Maya, Noel Enrique; Flores, Juan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
11/29

Versión definitiva en trámite
REVISTA: Congreso CECTI - CECTI (pags. 1-8), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-8617;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://cecti.homelinux.org/congreso_ciencia/
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2014-10-18
Social Mining en un Ecosistema de Big Data
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Torres-Millarez, Cristhian; Sanchez-Vega, Jorge
REVISTA: 9no Congreso CECTI - CECTI (pags. 275-281), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-8617;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://mega.co.nz/#!eNQ1WLDa!tsJMoqQuHBGmsJ-mn3wIZUUuOV3_c0DmOsCfjGnBBhY
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2014-10-15
SISTEMA DE CONTROL Y SEGUIMIENTO DE DIABETES TIPO I EN NIÑOS Y JÓVENES
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Sánchez-Vega, Jorge; Contreras-Jiménez, Rocío
REVISTA: Congreso CECTI - CECTI (pags. 1465-1475), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-8617;
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: https://mega.co.nz/#!eNQ1WLDa!tsJMoqQuHBGmsJ-mn3wIZUUuOV3_c0DmOsCfjGnBBhY
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2011-01-01
PROJECT SCHEDULING MODELS: A LITERATURE REVIEW
Autor(es): Ruiz-Vanoye, Jorge A.; Díaz-Parra, Ocotlán; Zavala-Díaz, José C.; Fuentes-Penna, Alejandro; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
REVISTA: International Journal of Industrial Engineering - International Journal of Industrial Engineering (pags. 431-442), MÉXICO; ISSN: 1072-4761; INDEXADO EN: JCR
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://journals.sfu.ca/ijietap/index.php/ijie/index
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
2010-05-01
GUIDELINE OF IDENTIFICATION AND TRACK ON SUPPORT¿S LEVEL ON MEXICAN VERY SMALL ENTERPRISES (MVSE)
Autor(es): Fuentes-Penna, Alejandro; Díaz-Parra, Ocotlán; Zavala-Díaz, José C.; Ruiz-Vanoye, Jorge Alberto; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
REVISTA: IJCOPI - CONACyT (pags. 1-7), MÉXICO; ISSN: 2007-1558; INDEXADO EN: REDALYC
DIRECCION ELECTRÓNICA: http://ijcopi.org/ojs/index.php?journal=ijcopi
PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2008-02-01
CLIENT-SIDE MANAGER FOR MULTI-FORMAT WEB CONTENT TRANSCODING FOR MOBILE DEVICES
Autor(es): Gonzalez-Serna, Juan Gabriel; Estrada-Esquivel, Hugo; Montes-Rendón, Azucena; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; López-Sánchez, Máximo
REVISTA: Polish Journal of Envinronment Studies - Polish Journal of Environment Studies (pags. 217-220), POLONIA; ; INDEXADO EN: JCR
PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2008-01-01
A ON-THE-FLIGHT PROXY SYSTEM FOR MULTI-FORMAT WEB CONTENT TRANSCODING FOR MOBILE DEVICE
Autor(es): Gonzalez-Serna, Juan Gabriel; Estrada-Esquivel, Hugo; Montes-Rendon, Azucena; Sosa-Sosa, Victor Jesús; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
REVISTA: UWSI: Lecture Notes in Computer Science - Springer (pags. 248-258), MÉXICO; ISSN: 0302-9743; INDEXADO EN: JCR
PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
Libro
2015-01-30
Moviweb
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
A pesar del gran auge que han tenido los dispositivos móviles en nuestros días, el acceso a Internet a través de esta clase de dispositivos es sumamente limitado. Esto se debe a que los sitios Web no se
diseñan tomando en cuenta las características y limitantes de estos dispositivos con el propósito de hacer los recursos Web más accesibles. Así por ejemplo, las restricciones de pantalla, la poca capacidad
de memoriay de almacenamiento, los enlaces de comunicaciones no persistentes, los altos costos de conexión y el deficiente ancho de banda, han frenado la visualización de sitios Web a través de
dispositivos móviles. El presente trabajo pretende "poner la Web en los bolsillos de los usuarios". Para garantizar que los usuarios puedan visualizar correctamente los recursos Web, se necesitan dos cosas:
un servicio de gestión de conexiones que permita visualizar contenidos Web sin importar el estado de conexión del dispositivo, un servicio de acaparamiento de sitios Web y un mecanismo que adapte el
contenido Web a las características propias del dispositivo móvil específico (transcodificación). En este trabajo se presenta una herramienta que integra estos servicios.
PUBLICADO EN: España; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
12/29

Capítulo
2025-03-07
Automatic Detection of Abnormal Pedestrian Flows, Using Classification and Tracking with Pre-trained YOLOv8
Autor(es): Núñez-Vieyra, Adrián; Ferreira-Escutia, Rogelio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo;Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
The use of artificial intelligence is a practice that is increasingly integrated into video surveillance systems, whether closed-circuit television systems or systems with intelligent IP cameras. In this way, video
surveillance systems usually offer, at low cost, different functionalities such as object and person detection, facial recognition, issuing intrusion alerts, etc. However, with this dynamic has also increased the
need to store, transmit and manipulate large amounts of data associated with video and the additional information that is generated daily. In this article we present a methodology and a video surveillance
application focused on the automatic detection of abnormalities in pedestrian flow, using smart IP cameras, pre-trained YOLOv8 and statistical event recording with MongoDB. The accuracy tests in counting
and tracking pedestrian flow that we have carried out give us results of Precision = 90%, Recall = 84%, Specificity = 62.5% and F1 = 87%, in addition to generating alerts when it detects abnormal pedestrian
flows.
LIBRO: Advances in Computational Intelligence. MICAI 2024 International Workshops - Springer (pags. -), ALEMANIA; ISBN: 978-3-031-83882-8;
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2024-06-17
Towards the Automatic Construction of Multimodal Graphical and Voice Interfaces
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; González-Serna, Juan Gabriel; Ramos-Díaz, J. Guadalupe; Castro-Sánchez, Noé Alejandro, González-Murueta, Johan Walter
The development of natural language processing is popularizing the use of voice interfaces in current applications. However, many of the interfaces currently developed are graphical interfaces that have been
surpassed for the new needs of users. Hence, the use of multimodal interfaces, both visual and voice, is necessary to be more friendly and easy to use by final users. To do this, it would be necessary to
redesign current graphic systems to integrate voice interfaces. This work shows that it is possible to develop multimodal interfaces starting from existing graphical interfaces by adding voice interfaces through
previously designed dialogue and interactions. Tests were carried out through Web forms using feature extraction techniques, where satisfactory results were obtained.
LIBRO: Mexican Conference on Pattern Recognition - Springer (pags. -), MÉXICO; ISBN: 978-3-031-62836-8;
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2024-03-24
An IoT Blockchain to Improve the Traceability on Agri-Food Applications
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen
The traceability of any product and food is vital within the supply chain of various food organizations, countries, and society in general since it allows us to know details of the logistics of food products at all
times and, therefore, guarantees their food security by participating various entities including producers, consumers, intermediaries, regulators, etc. It becomes complicated to track these agricultural products,
particularly in environments where small computing elements are needed, such as harvesting fruits and vegetables. This work proposes a traceability scheme based on Blockchain that can be interoperable
with various manufacturers and on different computing architectures. The results demonstrate that the traceability of agri-food systems can be carried out in a good way at an affordable cost.
LIBRO: Advances in Real-Time Intelligent Systems - Springer (pags. -), MÉXICO; ISBN: 978-3-031-55848-1;
PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2022-08-22
Smart Disaggregated Electrical Energy Metering System
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Mier-Urbina, Sergio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, Jose Antonio; Chavez-Baez, Marco Vinicio
In recent years, electrical power systems have focused on achieving three basic principles: decarbonization, digitization, and decentralization, to make electricity consumption more efficient. One of the best
ways to improve electricity consumption is awareness by end consumers. To do this, the user must always know their electricity consumption and check it separately for each type of device. The present work
shows a smart metering system that, through signal processing, can understand the electrical consumption disaggregated by every kind of device without the need for another device in addition to the power
meter.
LIBRO: Aplicaciones de la Computacion - Universidad Michoacana (pags. -), MÉXICO; ISBN: 1234567890;
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2021-06-05
A Proposal of Linked Data for Smart Metering System
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
This paper shows the proposal of the use of linked data for smart metering systems. The aim of linked data in smart grid applications such as smart metering systems is to give semantic knowledge of the
energy transactions between all participators in the power markets. In combination with other technologies like blockchain, the linked data could improve decentralization and security in the world's energetic
future.
LIBRO: 2020 KGSWC Winter School - Springer (pags. -), MÉXICO; ISBN: 607-10-23456;
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2020-10-09
Forecasting Electricity Consumption Using Weather Data in an Edge-Fog-Cloud Data Analytics Architecture
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime
The forecasting of electricity consumption is a well-study research problem; however, electricity consumption is a complex model because it depends on many factors, and its accuracy is not always accurate.
The accuracy of this forecasting impact; for example, in the utilities in the bulk generation of electricity and in the end-user at economical prices. This work shows the implementation of a forecasting model
considering weather data across the smart metering system infrastructure using and edge-fog-cloud architecture for data analytics. The results show that using weather data across edge-fog-cloud architecture
is an excellent alternative to forecast electricity consumption.
LIBRO: Advances on P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet Computing - Springer (pags. -), MÉXICO; ISBN: 978-3-030-61104-0;
PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Bases de datos)
2020-10-06
Arquitectura de un Lago de Datos para Sistemas de Medición Inteligente
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ruíz-Martínez, Luis Enrique; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael
Con la inminente llegada de la cuarta revolución industrial, la red eléctrica se está moviendo hacia una red eléctrica inteligente, lo que le permite un sin fin de aplicaciones nuevas como lo son los sistemas de
medición inteligente. Estas nuevas aplicaciones generan una cantidad inmensa de datos de diversas fuentes y para brindar la "inteligencia" necesaria se necesita del análisis y procesamiento de los datos.
Para ello, es necesario de contar con repositorios de datos adecuados que permitan el almacenamiento, procesamiento y aplicación de los datos. Este trabajo presenta una arquitectura escalable de lagos de
datos para redes eléctricas inteligentes utilizando un enfoque de cómputo borde-niebla-nube. Los resultados parciales muestran que es factible su implementación y que puede ser trasladada a otros
contextos de sistemas ciber físicos o de IoT.
LIBRO: Aplicaciones de la Computación - SMCC / CONACyT (pags. -), MÉXICO; ISBN: 978-607-506-395-9;
PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Bases de datos)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
13/29

Memoria
2025-12-09
Causal inference applied to the calculation of insulin bolus in patients with type 1 diabetes using the GRaSP algorithm
Autor(es): Contreras-Jimenez, Rocio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
his work presents the development of an intelligent system based on causal inference to optimize the insulin bolus calculation for patients with type 1 diabetes. The GRaSP (Greedy Relaxations of the Sparsest
Permutation) algo- rithm was applied to the HUPA-UCM 2024 dataset to identify causal relation- ships between physiological and behavioral variables. Different data transfor- mations were tested, and medical
knowledge constraints were integrated to im- prove the consistency of the inferred graphs. Preliminary results show structural improvements with the applied constraints, although inconsistencies due to un-
observed confounders and non-normality in the data persist. This study demon- strates the potential of causal models to support personalized insulin calculation and glycemic control.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2025-11-13
Real-Time Processing Comparison of Python vs. C on the BeagleBone AI-64 for Power Quality Applications
Autor(es): García-Chávez, Juan Pablo; Chávez -Baez, Marco Vinicio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; García-Rodríguez, Eilen; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro; Olivares-
Rojas, Juan Carlos; López-Caballero, Marco Vinicio
This paper presents a comparative evaluation of Python and C for real-time signal processing on the BeagleBone AI-64, focusing on power quality monitoring applications. Real-time performance is critical in
power quality analysis to ensure the reliable operation of sensitive electronic equipment. The Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) using Daubechies 4 (db4) with five decomposition levels was implemented in
both languages and executed directly on the embedded platform to process signals affected by power quality disturbances. Accuracy was assessed using the Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE), while
computational efficiency was evaluated through per-sample processing time. Experimental results show that both Python and C achieve comparable precision, with MAPE values below 0.008 percent.
However, C demonstrates significantly superior real-time performance, processing each sample in under 100 microseconds and meeting strict real-time constraints. In contrast, Python exhibits longer execution
times, limiting its suitability to less time-critical or offline processing scenarios. These results highlight the importance of language selection for embedded real-time applications and provide experimental
evidence obtained directly on the target hardware.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2025-11-10
Directed Acyclic Graphs for Identifying Determinants of Postprandial Glucose in Type 1 Diabetes
Autor(es): Contreras-Jiménez, Rocío; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Gutíerrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
Type 1 Diabetes Mellitus (T1DM) requires precise glucose management to prevent complications. A significant challenge is determining the optimal insulin bolus dose, as errors can lead to hypo- or
hyperglycemia. This paper presents an application of Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) to model causal relationships that influence postprandial glucose levels using the HUPA-UCM dataset (25 T1DM patients
with glucose, insulin, activity, and dietary data). Three DAG models were generated: knowledge-based (DAG1), data-driven (DAG2), and adjusted (DAG3). Causal inference was performed using DoWhy,
revealing a statistically significant effect of insulin bolus on postprandial glucose. Each additional bolus unit reduced glucose between −1.30 mg/dL (DAG1) and −0.78mg/dL (DAG2/DAG3). Robust tests
confirmed stability (p>0.90). Results demonstrate that DAGs can reliably identify determinants of glycemic response and represent a promising tool for interpretable, personalized insulin dosing systems. These
results could support the design of intelligent insulin dosing systems capable of explaining their recommendations to clinicians and patients.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2025-11-10
Performance Benchmarking of Edge Devices for Real-Time Facial Recognition Systems
Autor(es): Lozada-Herrejón, Óscar Fernando; Ferreira-Escutia, Rogelio; Núñez-Vieyra, Adrián: Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Fraga-Aguilar, Miguelangel; Chávez-Baez, Marco Vinicio
Currently, within the field of Computer Vision in Robotics, algorithms that work in real time are required, so they must be processed as quickly as possible and locally on Edge Devices. Therefore, it is
necessary to analyze which algorithms are better and on which devices they can run faster. This article presents a performance comparison of three algorithms for realtime facial recognition, Histogram of
Oriented Gradients (HOG), Haar Cascades and Multi-Task Cascaded Convolutional Networks (MTCNN) implemented on embedded systems (Raspberry Pi 5 and Jetson Orin Nano) and a reference laptop. We
evaluate the models across multiple metrics including accuracy, frames per second (FPS), CPU/GPU utilization, and memory consumption. Our experimental includes a sequential benchmarking system that
automatically collects and visualizes performance data. Results demonstrate significant differences in resource efficiency and detection accuracy between the models, providing practical insights for real-world
embedded vision applications.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Robótica)
2025-10-09
ACONDICIONAMIENTO DE SEÑALES ELECTROMIOGRÁFICAS CON OFFSET DC PARA LECTURA SEGURA EN MICROCONTROLADORES
Autor(es): Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane; Celedón-Cabrera, Oscar Toshiko; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; González-Vázquez, Alberto; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Méndez-
Patiño, Arturo
La electromiografía es una técnica ampliamente utilizada en rehabilitación, control de prótesis e interfaces humano-máquina. No obstante, la digitalización de estas señales mediante microcontroladores
presenta retos importantes, debido a su baja amplitud en el orden de milivoltios, su naturaleza bipolar y la presencia de ruido y artefactos de movimiento. Estas condiciones pueden provocar saturación o
pérdida de información en convertidores analógico-digitales unipolares, típicos en plataformas de bajo costo. Con el fin de garantizar una adquisición confiable, en este trabajo se propone un sistema de
acondicionamiento de señal con desplazamiento de nivel offset, estructurado en tres etapas principales: (i) amplificación instrumental de la señal Electromiográfica, (ii) filtrado analógico en el rango de 20-500
Hz para reducir interferencias y artefactos, y (iii) adición de un offset que desplaza la señal hacia un rango compatible con el convertidor analógico-digital del microcontrolador ATMega328P. Los resultados
experimentales evidencian que la señal acondicionada mantiene su morfología original, evitando la saturación y permitiendo su digitalización de manera estable en el rango de 0-3.3 V. Esta adaptación
posibilita el análisis digital posterior, facilitando la implementación de algoritmos de procesamiento en tiempo real y el desarrollo de aplicaciones biomédicas basadas en Electromiografía. En conclusión, el
diseño propuesto ofrece una solución práctica y de bajo costo para la integración segura de señales Electromiográficas en sistemas embebidos, contribuyendo al avance de dispositivos de rehabilitación,
control protésico e interfaces humano-máquina.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2025-10-09
ANÁLISIS COMPARATIVO DE CLASIFICADORES MULTICLASE PARA SEÑALES SEMG DEL BÍCEPS BRAQUIAL
Autor(es): Gutiérrez-Medina, José Diego; Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane; Chavez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
En este trabajo se presenta un análisis comparativo del desempeño de distintos algoritmos de clasificación multiclase aplicados a señales de electromiografía superficial (sEMG) obtenidas del bíceps braquial
dominante en ocho sujetos voluntarios masculinos. Las señales se registraron en tres condiciones experimentales: reposo (0), contracción media (1) y contracción completa (2). Se aplicaron técnicas de
preprocesamiento (filtrado Butterworth, normalización y segmentación por ventanas) y se extrajeron características en los dominios temporal, frecuencial y no lineal (entropías). Posteriormente, se evaluaron
Máquinas de Soporte Vectorial (SVM con kernels lineal, polinómico y gaussiano), Redes Neuronales Artificiales (ANN) y métodos Ensemble. El rendimiento se midió mediante validación cruzada k-fold
considerando exactitud, sensibilidad y puntaje-F. Los resultados mostraron diferencias significativas entre clasificadores, destacando la superioridad de las SVM con kernel gaussiano en la mayoría de las
métricas.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Medio Ambiente → Bioprocesos)
2025-07-18
Sistema Multimodal Basado en Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural para la Captura y Consulta de Información en Base de Datos Médicas
Autor(es): Mata-Martínez, Pedro; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Chávez-Campos, Gerardo Marx; Zavala-Díaz, Jonathan; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen, Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
En el campo médico, la captura manual de información durante las consultas clínicas representa una limitación para la atención al paciente. Este artículo presenta el desarrollo de un sistema multimodal que
utiliza Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural (PLN) para automatizar la captura y recuperación de datos del historial médico, con un enfoque en pacientes con diabetes. Se emplearon técnicas como diarización
de hablantes, tokenización, vectorización y redes neuronales para procesar las grabaciones de las consultas, logrando identificar y almacenar exitosamente información clínica relevante. Los resultados
muestran una mayor eficiencia en el llenado de campos de la base de datos y una clasificación precisa de la información.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2025-05-27
Edge Computing Instrumentation for Imaging Wetting Front Propagation Using Electrical Impedance Tomography Measurements
Autor(es): Gutierrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Rodriguez-Herrejon, Javier Alejandro, Yang, Wuqiang; Robledo-Ayala, Alejandro Israel; Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane; Chavez-Baez,
Marco Vincio; Lopez-Chavez, Marco Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
The adequate management of water resources is of national strategic interest to guarantee access, equitable and sustainable distribution of the water resource as a key component for national socio-economic
development and the preservation of the environment. In general, agriculture consume the largest volume of water available for consumptive use. Amongst the factors that contribute to irrigation water wastage
is the lack of knowledge of the soil hydraulic conductivity properties. Therefore, there are incentives to propose new methods and techniques, in coherence with current trends in agri-instrumentation and
information technology systems, to assess the hydraulic conductivity properties of soils, in order to provide hard data that can in turn be used to optimize water resources planning and allocation for irrigation
purposes. Here, the authors present an IoT Electrical Impedance Tomography sensor (Electrical impedance Tomography - Wetting Front Detector: EIT-WFD) for in situ monitoring the change of water content in
crop soils as irrigation is applied. The distributed computing architecture on the edge allows obtaining data for imaging the soil wetting front propagating down the soil sample, and facilitates the integration of
hydraulic conductivity data with other agriculture sensing systems and have important implications for evaluating the effects of irrigation and agricultural management.
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
14/29

PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2025-05-27
Evaluation of an Analog Wide-Bandwidth Gain and Phase Detector for a Compact Electrical Impedance Tomography Data Acquisition System
Autor(es): Gutierrez-Lopez, Marcos; Robledo-Ayala, Alejandro Israel; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) is a technique used in industrial, food, and medical applications. It operates by injecting a constant current through electrodes and measuring peripheral voltages in an
array of 16 to 256 electrodes. This work presents an EIT system based on the AD8302, a phase and magnitude detector operating from DC to 2.7 GHz. It complies with IEC60601 standards, enabling its use in
clinical environments such as breast cancer detection and muscle tissue analysis. In order to comply with the mains electrical safety isolation guidelines, the data acquisition system is powered by means of
two embedded switched converters: AC/DC converter (4KV isolation) and DC/DC converter (1.5 kV) Isolation. Excitation is generated using the AD9833 and an improved Howland current source (100 µA to 1
mA). A microcontroller, Atmega 2560, controls the measurement process using 16 electrodes selected via ADG1406 multiplexers. Image reconstruction is performed with the Linear Backprojection algorithm in
Visual Studio. Tests in an acrylic tank with copper, PVC, carrot, and potato inclusions demonstrated accuracy in locating biological and non-biological materials. The system stands out for its modular design
and high safety, making it a promising tool for medical and industrial applications.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2025-05-27
Imaging Breast Cancer Targeted Chemotherapy Drug Dispersion in Ex-vivo Swine Tissue Using Electrical Impedance Tomography: A Pilot Controlled-Delivery
Study
Autor(es): Gutierrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Vazquez-Nambo, Manuel; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Rodriguez-Herrejon, Javier Alejandro; Yang, Wuqiang; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutierrez-Lopez,
Marcos; Robledo-Ayala, Alejandro Israel; Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane
Targeted controlled release of chemotherapy drugs for breast cancer treatment has emerged as a new treatment paradigm to increase treatment efficacy while reducing systemic toxicity. However, there is a
lack of ad hoc biomedical instrumentation imaging systems to detect the presence of the drug compound upon targeted delivery and measure the kinetics of drug dispersion in tissues to verify that the drug
compound effectively remains in the target tissue area. The authors present the advances in the development of an Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) imaging system, and image analysis method, to
measure drug dispersion in tissues as an auxiliary tool for evaluating the effectiveness of controlled delivery therapies for breast cancer treatment. Experiments were conducted where a dosage of doxorubicin
(Lyophilized) is applied to ex-vivo swine tissue in a test phantom. Following the controlled delivery, a sequence of images was obtained at regular intervals. The resulting images were processed by difference
imaging in time to detect the changes in drug concentration in the sample tissue. The results indicate that the EIT measurement system and difference imaging analysis method can be used to detect and
quantify the drug dispersion kinetics.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2025-05-27
Evaluation of Electrical Impedance Tomography Electrodes in the Measurement of Biceps Muscle Activity
Autor(es): Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane; Gutiérrez-Medina, José Diego; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; González-Vázquez, Alberto; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Mendéz-Patiño,
Arturo
Electrical impedance tomography (EIT) is a non-invasive imaging technique used to assess the electrical conductivity of biological tissues which in turn can be related to other physiological tissue properties
such as hydration status, vascular inflow, tissue composition and pathological conditions. The ability of EIT to provide information in real time, has sparked interest in rehabilitation, sport science and clinical
diagnostics applications. Thus, EIT emerges as a suitable measurement solution to detect muscle activation patterns from changes in the electrical conductivity due to muscle activity. EIT measurements rely
on the use of a set of electrodes placed in contact with the skin around the muscle to be studied. Therefore, there is a compromise between electrode size, shape and material to yield the best quality of
measurements while allowing placing sufficient electrodes for EIT imaging. In this paper, the authors evaluate the performance of different types of reusable electrodes in terms of measurement stability, noise,
response to muscle contraction and root mean square error. The results suggest that the shape and material of the electrode significantly influence the quality of the bioimpedance measurements and the
reconstructed images. Stainless steel resulted in the most suitable option for delivering consistent and reliable bioimpedance measurements for EIT image reconstruction. e image reconstruction.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2025-05-27
Comparison of qualitative and quantitative impedance tomography image reconstruction methods
Autor(es): Robledo-Ayala, Alejandro Israel; Gutiérrez-Lopez, Marcos ; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane
In recent years, electrical impedance tomography (EIT) has gained significant relevance in research, agriculture, and biomedicine. To meet the specific needs of each application, specialized systems and
algorithms have been developed. Evaluating their performance is crucial for their improvement and effective application. This work presents a methodology for the evaluation of EIT systems using mathematical
tools such as the Pearson Correlation Coefficient (PCC) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE). These metrics quantify the similarity and accuracy of qualitative and quantitative reconstruction algorithms using
synthetic data generated in COMSOL Multiphysics. The results show that the PCC ranges from 0.8166 to 0.9686, while the RMSE varies between 0.12456 and 0.14827, depending on the electrical properties
of the material and the domain. This methodology establishes a framework for integrating new evaluation tools, contributing to the advancement of EIT systems and reconstruction algorithms.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2025-01-26
MODELO DE SISTEMAS DE RECUPERACIÓN DE INFORMACIÓN SEMÁNTICA CON BASE EN COMPILADOR
Autor(es): Ramos-Diaz, J. Gudalupe; Ferreira-Escutia, Rogelio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Núñez-Vieyra, Adrián; Navarro-Alatorre, Isela; Ruíz-Lagunas, Juan Jesús
La publicación de información de interés público en la modalidad de datos abiertos, mediante archivos formateados a partir de lenguajes semánticos de la Web 3.0 tales como RDF, RDFS u OWL constituyó
un hito en la difusión de información para consumo masivo de los seres humanos. Sin embargo, a pesar de ser una solución conveniente para compartir información precisa, no ambigua, en contraste con la
publicación de información en lenguaje natural, no tuvo un éxito superlativo a nivel global. Esto se debe en parte a que la publicación de la información requería conocimientos especializados en los lenguajes
semánticos en comparación con el hecho de publicar una página con redacción en lenguaje natural. En este trabajo proponemos un modelo de sistema de recuperación de información en el que colocamos
un compilador de dominio específico, es decir un compilador diseñado exprofeso para procesar archivos RDF de un dominio particular de aplicación con funcionalidad en dos sentidos, primero para convertir
información hacia tripletas RDF y el segundo para compilar tripletas RDF. De esta manera, un usuario que desee publicar información en formato RDF no requerirá conocimientos especializados, haciendo
más fácil la generación de un RDF store. Por otra parte, quien desee alimentar el RDF store podrá subir tripletas que serán validadas por el compilador e incorporadas al almacén. Este compilador, construido
a partir de herramientas generadores de procesadores de lenguajes como ANTLR, está integrado en la propuesta del sistema de recuperación de información semántica.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2025-01-26
MODELADO DE PROPIEDADES DE CONDUCTIVIDAD HIDRÁULICA DE SUELOS DE CULTIVO USANDO MEDICIONES DE IMPEDANCIA ELÉCTRICA
Autor(es): Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Yang, Wuqiang; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
La descripción cuantitativa de las propiedades de conductividad hidráulica del suelo de cultivo es fundamental para optimizar el uso de recursos hídricos. Continuamente se proponen modelos analíticos y
numéricos para intentar predecir las dinámicas de infiltración de agua, e identificar parámetros hidráulicos para planear esquemas de asignación y uso de recursos hídricos para irrigación. Sin embargo, el
proceso de percolación es dinámico, es de naturaleza no-lineal y depende de una gran cantidad de variables, desde el tipo, uso y contenido químico de suelo, hasta la localización geográfica y condiciones
climáticas. En consecuencia, los resultados derivados de estudios teóricos, rara vez se pueden extrapolar para predecir las propiedades de los suelos con respecto a la evolución y uso del suelo, aún para la
misma región y/o terreno. En este trabajo se propone que la utilización de técnicas de identificación de sistemas en base a mediciones de cambios de impedancia del suelo conforme se aplica el riego, puede
entregar modelos de conductividad hidráulica que se ajusten las condiciones cambiantes del suelo de cultivo. Para obtener las mediciones se utiliza un sistema de instrumentación multinivel para medición de
impedancia del suelo, que se transfieren a un algoritmo de identificación de sistemas en espacio de estados para obtener los modelos de conductividad hidráulica. Los modelos resultantes se evalúan en
términos de porcentaje de aproximación y criterio de información Akaike con una exactitud promedio superior a 94%.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Electrónica)
2024-11-12
Execution time comparison of algorithms to classify power quality disturbances in single board computers
Autor(es): Medina-Molina, Jonatan Ali; Árzate-Rueda, Berenice; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro
In recent years, analysis of power quality disturbances has taken on great relevance due to the greater use of power electronic equipment and the search for alternative sustainable energy sources whose use
generates fluctuations in the electrical grid. In real-time applications, studying hardware platforms that allow disturbance detection and classification algorithms to run is relevant. The present work shows the
implementation of an algorithm based on Discrete Wavelet Transform and Support Vector Machine in different single-board computers to identify and classify power quality disturbances. From the results, a
success rate of 99.80% is obtained in the classification of seven power quality events and an execution time of less than 2 ms for Raspberry Pi4 and BeagleBone AI-64.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2024-11-12
Software and Hardware Processing of Jove Radio-Telescope Signals
Autor(es): Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Chávez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; García-Ramírez, María del Carmen; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Astronomy allows us to study outer space, understand how our solar system was formed, analyze the celestial objects that exist, as well as study the effects that these objects have on our planet. Through
optical telescopes we can see and study these objects by observing their radiation in the visible, infrared and ultraviolet spectrum. Through radio telescopes (radio antennas) we can study emissions outside
the visible spectrum, in a radio frequency section of the electromagnetic spectrum, providing valuable information. It is known that some objects emit radiation at specific frequencies. An essential processing of
a radio telescope signal is to obtain the received frequency spectrum to determine whether the frequency of interest was received. This processing can be done in software that hardly works in real time, or in
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
15/29

hardware to try to achieve real-time processing. This work shows the software and hardware processing of signals received by the antenna and receiver of the Radio Jove project, aimed at studying the signals
generated by Jupiter and its moon Io.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Procesamiento de señales)
2024-11-12
Supervised learning-based soft sensor design for a distillation column
Autor(es): Moreno-Sotelo, Gregorio; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Heras-Cervantes, Mario; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
his paper presents the design of soft sensors based on supervised learning for a distillation column. The sensors are designed to estimate specific temperature values during the process. Three virtual sensors,
based on three different models to determine the best performance, are developed considering a dataset obtained from the real process. The dataset contains 100 files, each corresponding to a different
distillation process and containing from 6,000 to 10,000 data, the variables considered were the temperatures in every plate. The results demonstrate an estimation error between 0.28 to 0.41.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Electrónica)
2024-04-30
A Blockchain Solution to Improve the Traceability of the Agri-Food Supply Chain
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Martínez, Josue Gerardo; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen
Since traditional agricultural traceability systems are largely centralized, traceability results are not always accurate, there is a risk of privacy data leakage. A trustworthy agricultural traceability system built on
the Ethereum Blockchain was suggested to solve these issues. On the other hand, the use of Blockchain and IPFS (Interplanetary File System) dual storage architecture was created to lessen the blockchain’s
storage demands for effective information queries and prevent data explosion. To stop the leakage of sensitive and other critical data, a method for data privacy protection is suggested based on cryptographic
primitives. Using the Ethereum blockchain platform, a portion of the planned system was implemented, and a cost, performance, and security analysis were conducted in addition to a comparison with
conventional agricultural traceability systems. The outcomes demonstrated that the proposed system could be effective and practical and satisfy future suitable application needs.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Alimentos → Agricultura)
2023-12-18
Detection of Power Quality Disturbances in Real Time Based on FPGA
Autor(es): García Rodríguez, Eileen; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Chávez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Detecting disturbances using digital signal processing methods and techniques that allow the correct extraction of their distinctive characteristics to make the classification more effective is necessary for Power
Quality monitoring. But developing an automatic detection system to be applied in smart measurement devices is not a trivial task, especially in obtaining a low computational cost method that can be
integrated into hardware, due to the need to coordinate the functions of data acquisition, preprocessing, detection, and data exchange in real-time. It has been demonstrated that FPGA is a sufficiently fast
hardware platform that allows the detection of disturbances of transient nature. In this work, a methodology for detection and extraction of the distinctive features of seven simple power quality disturbances
based on Discrete Wavelet Transform and methods of energy and RMS values extraction, implemented in real-time using the Artix-7 FPGA from Xilinx, is proposed. From implementing the proposed
methodology on the hardware platform, the result obtained is an algorithm that allows extracting the distinctive features of the analyzed disturbances, making optimal use of memory and processing resources,
which makes this procedure efficient for its implementation in real time.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2023-11-13
Development of an algorithm for the calculation of insulin bolus trough the identification of patterns in the data from daily records of patients whit type
1 diabetes
Autor(es): Contreras-Jimenez, Rocio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen
Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) is an autoimmune disease, in which the beta cells of the pancreas are destroyed, given the impossibility of producing insulin , the patient must receive it externally. Additionally, the
patient must lead a healthy lifestyle to maintain their glucose levels within the recommended range. Currently, there have been many technological advances to monitor and control of diabetes, the application
of artificial intelligence through the development of algorithms for calculation of insulin bolus, which allow greater accuracy and fewer incidences of hypoglycemia in the patient is a great advance. In this article ,
the proposal for an insulin bolus calculation integrated system is presented, which considers the account of carbohydrates in food, the ratio, pandrial glucose and active insulin; besides other factors such as
exercise, mood and hormonal aspects such as the menstrual cycle, in order to establish specific patterns for each patient, and through machine learning, be able to generate bolus calculations that prevent
hypoglycemia and keep the patient in range.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2023-11-13
Development of a Natural Language Processing Interface for Query and Analysis of Clinical Notes in a Hospital Data Lake
Autor(es): Zavala-Díaz, Jonathan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
The proliferation of unstructured data in electronic health records poses a critical challenge to healthcare. This project addresses the gap in care for Spanish-speaking users, focusing on data related to
diabetes. Our goal is to develop a specialized natural language processing interface to efficiently access medical information. Our research involves the creation of a question and answer (Q&A) model in
Spanish, focused on the clinical notes of diabetic patients. We have collected a substantial data set of 503,403 clinical notes in Spanish, converting them for analysis. Preliminary findings indicate variations in
note length and number of notes per patient. Manual annotation is required to identify diabetes related notes. Our initial research evaluated biomedical devices, analyzing their performance in speech-to-text
and text-to-speech applications, vital to our multimodal medical tool. Our ongoing research aims to close the language gap, providing a valuable resource for Spanish-speaking medical users and professionals
dealing with diabetes-related care. 1 Motivation The vast amount of unstructured information stored in patients' electronic health records. Accessing this information quickly is essential to guarantee its correct
use by medical professionals. An effective way to access data in these electronic records is through questions formulated in natural language, making automatic question answering (Q&A) methods an intuitive
interface for locating information in these records. Most previous research in the field of QA in electronic health records has focused on models designed for the English language, which has left the adoption of
these technologies for Spanish speakers lagging. Therefore, this project seeks to address this gap by developing a natural language processing interface specifically geared toward Spanish-speaking users,
with a particular focus on diabetes. The purpose is to facilitate access and analysis of relevant medical information, providing Spanish-speaking medical
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2023-11-13
Automatic Detection of Threatening Environments through a Neighborhood Video Surveillance Network
Autor(es): Núñez-Vieyra, Adrián; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo
Video surveillance systems are usually a monitoring and analysis tool to clarify events of different kinds: traffic accidents, assaults on public roads, robberies and breakins on private property, etc. However,
their efficiency has been reduced because the participation of people is still necessary for their operation, which is why they end up becoming an extensive database, whose consultation and review is usually
exhausting and often of little use due to technical deficiencies of the equipment or poor configuration and operation of the same. Another problem that video surveillance systems face is the saturation of false
positives in the alerts they send to users, which are triggered by the slightest movement or change in lighting. Some video surveillance systems have additional functionalities such as object detection and
person recognition, they can perform automatic video analysis and be more intelligent when generating alerts, however, it is frustrating that their usefulness remains until the crime has occurred. In this project,
a methodology and a framework are proposed for the implementation of a neighborhood video surveillance network with predictive capabilities, which detects, classifies and records potential threats before a
crime occurs.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2023-10-18
Difference of Gaussians for Regions Detection in Cervical Cytology to help Cancer Diagnosis
Autor(es): Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Rodríguez-Medina, K.B.
Cervical cytology, such as the Pap smear, has been a fundamental tool in the early detection of cervical lesions and the prevention of cervical cancer. However, the accurate and reliable detection of abnormal
regions in cytological samples can be challenging, especially in cases of low-quality and low-definition images. In the field of cervical cytology, precise detection of regions of interest is crucial for the early and
effective diagnosis of cervical cancer. In this study, we propose the use of the Difference of Gaussians method to enhance blob detection in cytological samples. This method allows for the identification and
delineation of areas of interest, even in images with poor quality and definition. By adjusting the values of the standard deviation, the detection sensitivity can be tailored to the specific characteristics of each
sample. This promising methodology has the potential to significantly improve the diagnostic process and contribute to earlier and more accurate detection of cervical cancer.
PUBLICADO EN: Estados Unidos; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2023-10-18
Comparative Assessment of Embedded Devices for Natural Language Processing for Biomedical Applications in Spanish
Autor(es): Zavala-Díaz, Jonathan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
In this work, a comparative evaluation of embedded devices for Natural Language Processing (NLP) in biomedical applications in Spanish is carried out, specifically in text-to-speech and speech-to-text
algorithms. Several embedded devices have been selected to achieve this, including Jetson Nano, Raspberry Pi (4B, 400, and 3B+), and Latte Panda. This analysis focuses on key aspects such as execution
time, CPU usage percentage, and RAM usage percentage. These criteria will allow us to compare the evaluated devices' performance and determine the most suitable NLP in biomedical applications in
Spanish. This benchmarking is expected to provide valuable information to facilitate the selection of devices in future projects and applications within the NLP. This work will allow professionals and developers
to make informed decisions and optimize their resources when implementing NLP solutions in the biomedical field in Spanish.
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
16/29

PUBLICADO EN: Estados Unidos; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2023-10-18
Principal Component Regression and Partial Least Squares Regression Evaluation of Electrode Performance for Non-Invasive Multimodal Measurement of Arm
Muscle Activity
Autor(es): Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; González-Vázquez, Alberto
Surface electromyography (sEMG) is the de-facto biopotential medical instrumentation solution for non-invasive detection of limb motion EMG activation signals, which in turn provides important information
regarding intentional and reactive muscle activity. However, sEMG delivers information of electrical activity mainly due to superficial muscles over a wide sensing field. Additional physiological processes may
be elucidated by combining sEMG data with other measurements, such as Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) imaging, to assess muscular activity due to increased vascularization. In any case, the
choice of the electrode material and shape influences the quality of measured data; "wet" electrodes (Ag/AgCl) are typically used for non-invasive sEMG measurements, whereas "dry" electrodes (i.e. stainless
steel, copper-nickel) are preferred for electrical impedance measurements. Here, the authors explore the use of different types of electrode materials to measure sEMG upper limb motion signals, in
comparison with Ag/AgCl electrodes, to determine a suitable electrode array that can accommodate both sEMG and EIT measurements. sEMG data was obtained from 10 healthy volunteers and processed
using Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) and Principal Component Spectral Analysis (PCSA) for Principal Component Regression (PCR) and Partial Least Squares Regression (PLSR). The results suggest
that steel electrodes perform closer to commonly used Ag/AgCl electrodes, offering the potential for a developing a multimodal sEMG/EIT wearable measurement system for upper limb motion evaluation.
PUBLICADO EN: Estados Unidos; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2023-10-18
Appropriate Feature Extraction Methods for Detection of Disturbances Associated with Power Quality
Autor(es): Pedroza-Martínez, Pedro Rafael; Chávez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Rico-Medina, Aldo Vinicio; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Olivares-Rojas, Juan
Carlos
Monitoring disturbances in power quality (PQD) has gained importance in recent decades. This interest arises from the fact that disturbances associated with power quality directly affect the equipment
connected to the grid, leading to malfunctions or complete equipment failure. For this reason, efforts have been made to optimize the methods for detecting these disturbances occurring in the electrical
network.In this study, a Python algorithm is proposed to improve the detection and classification of seven types of simple electrical disturbances (sag, swell, flicker, oscillatory transient, interruption, harmonics,
and notch). The algorithm varies the combination of characteristic vectors extracted (energy, mean, standard deviation, skewness, Shannon entropy, RMS, kurtosis, and logEnergy entropy) obtained from the
Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) through Multiresolution Analysis (MRA) with 6 levels of detail. A database was generated by sampling three thousand five hundred electrical disturbances at 10 kHz. The
experiment involved connecting a Beagle Bone Black (BBB) development board to a BK Precision 4064 arbitrary waveform generator.Combinations of two characteristic vectors were extracted from each
signal in the database to evaluate them using the Random Forest classifier and determine which one is most suitable for this type of analysis based on their accuracy percentages.
PUBLICADO EN: Estados Unidos; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2023-05-15
Análisis de Métodos de Extracción de Características para la Detección de Perturbaciones Asociadas a la Calidad de la Energía
Autor(es): Pedroza Martínez, Pedro Rafael; Reyes Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez Gnecchi, José Antonio, Méndez Patiño, Arturo; Olivares Rojas, Juan Carlos; Rico Medina, Aldo Vinicio
El monitoreo de la calidad de la energía ha tomado importancia en las últimas décadas, este interés se debe a que las perturbaciones asociadas a la calidad de la energía afectan a los equipos conectados a
la red, ocasionando mal funcionamiento o hasta la pérdida total de estos artefactos, por esta razón se busca optimizar los métodos de detección de estas perturbaciones en la red. En el presente trabajo se
propone la investigación y recopilación de distintos métodos de detección de perturbaciones eléctricas, específicamente los trabajos que propongan él estudió de la variación de los vectores característicos
extraídos de las perturbaciones eléctricas, para así realizar una comparativa de los diferentes métodos propuestos en los diferentes trabajos y demostrar que la correcta selección del vector característico es
un factor importante al momento de la detección de dichas perturbaciones y por lo tanto es necesario continuar con su investigación.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2023-01-25
Analysis of the Appropriate Decomposition Level Based on Discrete Wavelet Transform for Detection of Power Quality Disturbances
Autor(es): Rico-Medina, Aldo Vinicio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, Jose Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Garcia-Ramirez, Maria del Carmen
The improvement in Power Quality has been a concern for both the public and private sectors in recent years. One of the main problems within this topic is the appearance of anomalies or disturbances in the
power supply, which represent sudden changes in the waveforms of the signals and cause severe damage to the utility grid. This paper presents a comparative study of different resolution levels for the
analysis of eight types of Single Power Quality Disturbances using Multiresolution Analysis. A set of disturbances was generated in MATLAB through their mathematical models and the extracted wavelet-based
features were normalized by Z-score. The results show that the use of nine resolution levels leads to an appropriate decomposition, since it allows obtaining a greater amount of information, without
compromising the computational performance, which would facilitate a future classification process.
PUBLICADO EN: Estados Unidos; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2022-10-25
Design and Implementation of a Network of Internet of Things Applications at the Higher Technological Institute of Uruapan
Autor(es): Carlos Zambrano Rodriguez, Juan Carlos Olivares Rojas, Raul Paz Alvarez, Heberto Ferreira Medina and Anastacio Antolino Hernandez
Currently in the world, there is a significant increase in the use of the Internet of Things (IoT), which has become practically a necessity in search of better productivity and a better lifestyle. It is easy to find IoT
solutions, which are very expensive, insecure, limited and with large electricity consumption. That is why this project aims to demonstrate and implement a protocol (LoRaWAN), in which in addition to being
stable, it is very little energy consumption that consumes, it can be used over very long distances without the need for an electrical connection and internet connection. This document shows its implementation,
in the Hardware part, the use of the LoRa module together with the sensors, the Gateway and the programming of the node to get the minimum possible energy consumption. This project is developed for the
Higher Technological Institute of Uruapan since in the institution there is an avocado orchard with large hectares, so a large staff is required for its care and maintenance, that is why through this network nodes
can be installed at great distances since the maximum range with the antenna that is worked has a range of 10KM around, which is large enough to receive data from sensors such as: humidity, temperature,
luminosity and rain. There is a wide variety of sensors, but only crop-specific sensors are used.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2022-08-08
Edge Computing Multimodal Instrumentation For Measurement And Modelling of Soil Hydraulic Conductivity
Autor(es): Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, Jose Antonio; Yang, Wuqiang, Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Fregoso-Tirado, Luis Enrique
Current trends in distributed computing facilitate data processing near the end user through Cloud-Fog-Edge architectures. Agricultural instrumentation applications can greatly benefit from edge computing
signal processing, to provide detailed information about soil hydraulic conductivity towards improving irrigation planning and scheduling. A multimodal instrumentation scheme is constructed with a combination
of field infiltrometer and wetting front detection to measure soil saturated hydraulic conductivity. Measurements were performed on a test lysimeter using sandy loam soil. The results indicate that the combined
instrumentation can provide detailed information of the soil hydraulic conductivity which has important implications for irrigation scheduling.
PUBLICADO EN: Francia; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Electrónica)
2022-07-27
Automated Field infiltrometer For Wireless Measurement of Saturated Soil Hydraulic Conductivity
Autor(es): Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Yang, Wuqiang; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Fregoso-Tirado, Luis Enrique
The dispersive and cohesive properties of soil moisture make it an important variable in regional microclimatic analyses and landscape change from runoff to weathering, partitioning, mass loss, and sediment
transport in croplands. Thus, measurement of soil hydraulic conductivity is important for assessing soil properties and plays an important role in decision making in water resources management. Soil saturated
hydraulic conductivity (Kfs) can be measured at the surface using field infiltrometers. However, measuring Kfs is a labour-intensive and repetitive task which may translate in estimate errors. Given the
importance of accurate determination of Kfs for earth sciences, there are continuous research efforts to simplify the data measurement of Kfs [1-2]. In coherence with current trends in information technology,
the authors present an automated field infiltrometer to aid in soil qualification tasks.
PUBLICADO EN: Italia; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Alimentos → Agricultura)
2022-07-20
IoT Instrumentation For Measurement and Modelling Of Wetting Front Propagation Dynamics Using Soil Electrical Impedance Data
Autor(es): Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Yang, Wuqiang; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Fregoso-Tirado, Luis Enrique
Soil moisture influences geomorphological, atmospheric, hydrological, and agricultural biological processes, and intersects multiple areas of scientific research. Moreover, soil moisture measurements play an
essential role in sustainable development since they allow elucidating information about the synergistic relationship between the processes involved in agricultural production [1]. One of the factors that
influence the correct use of water resources for irrigation is the correct characterization of soil hydraulic conductivity properties [2]. Therefore, planning and allocation of water resources requires accurate
knowledge of soil hydraulic conductivity properties. Electromagnetic soil humidity sensors (i. e. capacitive, Time Domain Reflectometry (TDR)) allow rapid on-site qualification; however, they produce a point-
wise or volume-wise which may be insufficient to correctly characterize soils. Here, the authors present the development and test of an IoT Electronic Wetting Front Detector for measuring the dynamics of
water propagation in soils, dividing the soils depth in discrete regions.
PUBLICADO EN: Italia; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Electrónica)
2022-05-16
Análisis de Métodos y Técnicas de Detección y Extracción de Características para la Clasificación de Perturbaciones Relacionadas a la Calidad de la Energía
Autor(es): Rico-Medina, Aldo Vinicio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique, Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Chávez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; García-Ramírez, María del Carmen
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
17/29

La Calidad de la Energía ha cobrado un gran interés para el sector público y privado en los últimos años. Este concepto se refiere al conjunto de parámetros y propiedades que guardan relación con la forma
de onda de las señales eléctricas. Uno de los principales problemas dentro de este tópico resulta en la aparición de anomalías o perturbaciones dentro del suministro, las cuales representan cambios
repentinos en la forma de onda de las señales y provocan severos daños en las redes y sistemas eléctricos. En este trabajo se presenta un recuento de algunas de las metodologías propuestas para su
detección y clasificación. Los resultados de la investigación demuestran que una de las mayores dificultades que se presenta tiene que ver con la migración de estas metodologías hacia un entorno real para
su posterior implementación en diversas aplicaciones tales como redes y medidores inteligentes.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2022-05-16
Propuesta Metodológica para el Desarrollo Ecológico de Software
Autor(es): Pacheco-Pimentel, Aída Miriam; Vega-Flores, María Yaneth; Sánchez-Hernández, Miriam Zulma; Pintor-Estrada, Abel Alberto; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
El concepto de sustentabilidad a lo largo de los últimos años, ha cobrado una relevancia muy significativa en torno al cuidado de todo lo que engloba el desarrollo de software en su parte ecológica. El
presente artículo se desarrolló con la finalidad de analizar si haciendo uso de las diferentes metodologías ágiles y software open source en el desarrollo de proyectos de software, se logra la reutilización de
código, ahorro de energía y recursos utilizados durante el desarrollo, cumpliendo con la funcionalidad, plazo y presupuesto establecidos inicialmente, logrando así la generación de software ecológico.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2021-11-10
Study of Public Key Cryptography Techniques for Authentication in Embedded Devices for Smart Grids
Autor(es): Zavala-Diaz, Jonathan; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Chávez-Baez, Marco Vinicio; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Méndez-Patino, Arturo
With the incorporation of Information and Communication Technologies into the Power Grids, the concept of Smart Grids arises. One of the main components in Smart Grid is the use of Embedded Systems
that allow the processing and communication of a great diversity of information and applications. However, using these technologies brings a series of new challenges, one of them, cybersecurity. Mechanisms
are necessary to provide security to the information shared between the devices that make up the Smart Grid; cryptography is one of the most used mechanisms. This article presents a study of cryptographic
techniques implemented in embedded devices (Raspberry Pi), using two cryptographic suites and a hardware security module (ZYMKEY). A comparison is made of algorithms used in smart meters to provide
authenticity to said devices.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2021-10-05
A Comparative Assessment of Embedded Databases for Smart Metering Systems
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo
This work presents a comparative study of various embedded database schemes for applications in smart metering systems to determine what the best way to store is and retrieve information in smart meters.
The assessment comparative takes into consideration a literature review and diverse database technologies factors. The results obtained can help database administrators to choose the right database not
only in the smart grid domain but also in different Internet of Things database applications.
PUBLICADO EN: Perú; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Bases de datos)
2021-09-14
Data Ingestion System for Interoperability and Integration of Hospital Data Online and in Real Time
Autor(es): Melchor-Uceda, Iran Arane; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; García-Ramírez, María del Carmen; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen
Since very remote times, the Mexican health sector has been characterized by being segmented and containing various actors, which generates problems in the quality of care within the users due to the lack
of data integration and interoperability. Recently, there have been modifications and updates in health matters derived from increased of use information and communication technologies in the health area. All
of this has brought new challenges and opportunities. One of the new opportunities is the growing generation of further information on patients' health through wearable and highly interconnected biomedical
devices that allow the health status of patients to be continuous checked. However, this also represents a considerable challenge in achieving the integration and interoperability of health data from various
media. That is why in this paper, the authors propose a methodology to integrate hospital data from multiple sources that can be homogenized through the storage of a data lake. The results suggest that the
integration and interoperability of hospital data in real-time and online are possible through a data ingestion system.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2020-12-18
Machine Learning Model for the Detection of Electric Energy Fraud using an Edge-Fog Computing Architecture
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Cerda-Jacobo, Ismael
One of the most relevant applications today in the smart grid is the use of artificial intelligence and analysis techniques over the data generated, allowing both end-users and utility companies new applications.
Energy fraud is considered one of the main non-technical losses for utilities that translate into economic losses, so being able to detect and minimize fraud becomes a vital necessity for utilities. This paper
presents a machine learning model that allows the detection of abnormal behaviors in readings of consumption and/or production of electrical energy that can be classified as energy fraud. The proposed
model is based on regression and classification techniques over an edge-fog computing architecture, and the results obtained show that its implementation in smart metering systems is adequate.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2020-11-26
Study of the User's Eye Tracking to Analyze the Blinking Behavior While Playing a Video Game to Identify Cognitive Load Levels
Autor(es): Lagunes-Ramírez Derick; González-Serna Gabriel; Lopez-Sánchez Máximo; Fragoso-Díaz Olivia; Castro-Sánchez Noé; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
As eye tracking studies are becoming more common, eye behavior is being explored in different scientific fields as it can be analyzed to detect changes in the mental state of users. In this way the development
of new products or technologies could include eye tracking as an objective way of obtaining feedback from users. This paper presents an experiment that compares the eye behavior of users' blinks during
interaction with two different levels of difficulty in a video game. The results of the experiment show that the participants' blink rate per minute was significantly reduced, according to the state-of-the-art normal
blink behavior, during the two tasks. However, it is also shown that there is no significant difference between the samples taken, which is attributable to the fact that interaction with video games, in any
difficulty, represents high cognitive load.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
2020-11-26
Improvement of forecasting and classification in smart metering systems using a neural compute stick
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; González-Serna, Juan Gabriel
Analyzing data on smart meters is a trend increasingly used by utility companies as it allows a better understanding of data directly from the source of origin. New distributed computing architectures like edge
computing have given advance to improve data analytics. Generally, the capacity of such devices, including smart meters, is quite limited, so the use of specialized auxiliary hardware has begun to be used in
these devices. The present work shows the results of using a neural stick compute for forecasting and data classification processes within smart metering systems. The results show that the processing times
can be remarkably improved with the use of stick computers having a suitable model for artificial neural networks.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2020-11-26
Detection and Feature Extraction of Single Power Quality Disturbances Based on Discrete Wavelet Transform, Energy Distribution and RMS Extraction
Methods
Autor(es): García-Rodríguez, Eilen; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Chávez-Báez, Marco Vinicio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Monitoring of power quality disturbances (PQD) in power systems is crucial in determining their causes and avoid equipment damages. In this work, a MatlabR algorithm was implemented to detect and extract
the distinctive features of seven simple power quality disturbances (sag, swell, interruption, flicker, harmonics, oscillatory transient, and notch). Firstly, a database was generated with the seven types of
disturbances designed from their mathematical models. The decomposition of the signals was subsequently performed using the Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) through the Multi-Resolution Analysis
(MRA) with six levels of details. The sampling frequency was varied to identify the useful features that, with energy distribution and RMS extraction methods, serve as input to classifiers to distinguish
disturbances. Three classifiers were considered to demonstrate the effectiveness of the algorithm to identify the useful features, Probabilistic Neural Network (PNN), k-nearest neighbors (k-nn) and Multilayer
Feed Forward Neural Network (MLFF). With the proposed method, it was possible to detect the seven simple disturbances analyzed, maintaining a balance between simplicity, robustness, and efficiency, which
will have an impact on guaranteeing a lower processing cost and can be used in real-time applications.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2020-10-29
Detección de Movimiento usando Medidores Inteligentes
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique;
Con la introducción de medidores inteligentes se pueden obtener beneficios no solo en el aspecto de mejoras en el servicio eléctrico sino también en seguridad. El uso de una cámara de vigilancia dentro del
medidor inteligente para detectar movimiento es una buena medida para mitigar el riesgo de robo o manipulación física del medidor. Los algoritmos de detección de movimiento son computacionalmente
pesados mientras que el hardware de los medidores inteligentes al igual que muchos otros sistemas embebidos es muy limitado. Por esto motivo, es necesario de algoritmos que sean rápidos para detectar
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
18/29

movimiento, pero a la vez eficientes. En el presente trabajo se muestra un algoritmo eficiente para detección de movimiento y se compara con una de las herramientas más populares, mostrando ser una
buena alternativa.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
2020-09-10
A Survey on Smart Metering Systems using Blockchain for E-Mobility
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Molina-Moreno, Ismael
Electricity is an essential comfort to support our daily activities. With the competitive increase and energy costs by the industry, new values and opportunities for delivering electricity to customers are produced.
One of these new opportunities is electric vehicles. With the arrival of electric vehicles, various challenges and opportunities are being presented in the electric power system worldwide. For example, under the
traditional electric power billing scheme, electric power has to be consumed where it is needed so that end-users could not charge their electric vehicles at different points (e.g. a relative's house) if this the
correct user is not billed (this due to the high consumption of electrical energy that makes it expensive). To achieve electric mobility, they must solve new challenges, such as the smart metering of energy
consumption and the cybersecurity of these measurements. The present work shows a study of the different smart metering technologies that use blockchain and other security mechanisms to achieve e-
mobility.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2019-10-29
Modelado Formal de Diálogo para Asistentes Virtuales Inteligentes
Autor(es): Díaz-Ramos, José Gudalupe; Pérez-Hernández, Ezequiel; Ferreira-Escutia, Rogelio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2019-10-28
MODELO DE PREDICCIÓN DE LECTURAS DE CONSUMO/PRODUCCIÓN DE ENERGÍA ELÉCTRICA PARA DETECTAR FRAUDES DE ENERGÍA
Autor(es): Álvarez-Anselmo, María Liliana; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Rodríguez-Maya, Noel Enrique; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
Con la llegada de los medidores inteligentes los reportes de consumo/producción de energía eléctrica se hacen de forma casi instantánea brindando la posibilidad del análisis de dichos datos para diversas
aplicaciones. La detección de fraudes en los consumos/producción de energía eléctrica es uno de los principales retos de las empresas que suministran el servicio de energía eléctrica dado que es
sumamente complicada su detección. En el presente trabajo se lleva a cabo la analítica de datos de las lecturas de consumo/producción de energía eléctrica de medidores inteligentes para determinar un
patrón de consumo/producción de energía que sirva de base para poder identificar fraudes de energía eléctrica. El análisis de los datos se realiza dentro del medidor inteligente mediante el uso del modelo de
regresión lineal, lo cual permite poder hacer análisis inteligente en tiempo real detectando potenciales fraudes. Para ello, se establece una métrica con respecto a las anomalías del valor que se predice con el
nuevo valor, con base a la observación de los datos generados. El modelo propuesto, establece automáticamente el valor máximo/mínimo como referencia, optimizando la detección automatizada de fraudes
de energía eléctrica.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2019-10-20
MODELO DE PREDICCIÓN DE LECTURAS DE CONSUMO/PRODUCCIÓN DE ENERGÍA ELÉCTRICA PARA DETECTAR FRAUDES DE ENERGÍA
Autor(es): Álvarez-Anselmo, María Liliana; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Rodríguez-Maya, Noel Enrique; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
MODELO DE PREDICCIÓN DE LECTURAS DE CONSUMO/PRODUCCIÓN DE ENERGÍA ELÉCTRICA PARA DETECTAR FRAUDES DE ENERGÍA
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2019-04-05
A Comparative Assessment of Cryptography Algorithms for Data Analytics Applications in Smart Metering Systems
Autor(es): Olivares Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; González-Murueta, Johan Walter; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen
With the proliferation of smart meters in smart electric networks, new applications and challenges to the energy sector are brought, mainly with respect to cybersecurity and data privacy. To protect them, a
mechanism that helps protect data is necessary, with cryptography being one of the most used. This paper presents a comparison of algorithms that can be used in smart meters to safeguard the
confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the data generated by smart meters and that, in turn, are efficient to process in this class of embedded devices.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2018-11-14
A Comparative Assessment of Blockchains in Embedded Systems
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Cerda-Jacobo, Jaime; Heras-Cervantes,
Mario
With the inclusion of network interfaces always connected to embedded systems, the concept of Internet of Things emerges. Today, IoT devices are in virtually all human activities facilitating the quality of life of
people. Despite the advantages of these devices, there are also some drawbacks, one of the main ones being cyber security. One of the technologies currently in vogue to mitigate cyber security problems is
blockchain. The overall blockchain approach is to be implemented on the server side, where computing capabilities are not as limited as in embedded systems. This paper proposes a methodology to assess
the blockchain technologies. To evaluate the proposed methodology a comparative study of various blockchain technologies that can be implemented in embedded systems particularly for use in smart meters
with SBC Raspberry Pi has been conducted. The results show that lightweight implementations of Blockchains are better for embedded systems.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2018-10-18
Robustecimiento de la Placa Raspberry Pi para Aplicaciones en el Internet de las Cosas
Autor(es): Zavala-Ramos, Juan Carlos; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Torres-Millarez, Cristhian; Antolino-Hernandez, Anastacio
Robustecimiento de la Placa Raspberry Pi para Aplicaciones en el Internet de las Cosas
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2018-10-18
Comparativa de Base de Datos para Sistema de Monitoreo en Medidores Inteligentes
Autor(es): Marín-Chávez, Cristhian Nivardy; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
Con la llegada de las Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicación a la Red Eléctrica se ha dotado a ésta de nuevas aplicaciones que facilitan la operación y control del sistema eléctrico haciéndolo más
inteligente. Una de las principales aplicaciones de la Red Eléctrica Inteligente hoy en día son los Sistemas de Medición Inteligente, los cuales permiten mejorar el proceso de lectura de consumo energía, así
como los cortes y reconexiones de forma automática sin necesidad de un lecturista. Para ello, la pieza fundamental de este proceso es el medidor inteligente, el cual posee capacidades de comunicación de
datos e interconexión a servicios de Internet. Actualmente los medidores inteligentes pueden medir además del consumo, la producción de energía a través de sistemas de energía renovables como paneles
fotovoltaicos y aerogeneradores; así como el manejo de precios dinámicos de energía entre otras aplicaciones. Todas estas nuevas tendencias hacen necesario que los medidores inteligentes comiencen a
almacenar grandes volúmenes de información dentro del dispositivo, por lo que es vital un sistema de almacenamiento de datos eficiente y con capacidades de monitoreo en todo momento. En este trabajo se
presenta una evaluación comparativa de bases de datos tanto relacionales como no relacionales para sistemas embebidos (medidores inteligentes) desde el punto de vista de sus capacidades de interfaces
para la Web que puede ser extendido a otros dispositivos de Internet de las Cosas.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Bases de datos)
2017-11-10
EMPRENDIMIENTO DE NEGOCIOS DE SOFTWARE
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Sánchez-Vega, Jorge; Villagómez-Cárdenas, Salvador Joanathan
El presente trabajo muestra la implementación de un conjunto de estrategias encaminadas a lograr que los estudiantes de las carreras del área de Sistemas y Computación puedan desarrollar competencias
de Emprendimiento de Negocios y Proyectos de Software, a través del desarrollo de habilidades suaves (tales como liderazgo, creatividad, trabajo en equipo, entre otras) que les permitan desarrollarse de
mejor forma en el ambiente profesional. Entre estas estrategias se encuentran la adaptación de los planes y programas de estudio para contar con el desarrollo de habilidades suaves, la propuesta de nuevos
planes y programas de estudio que permitan generar las competencias genéricas para lograr el emprendimiento de proyectos de base tecnológica con orientación al Software que ayuden a transformar
nuestro entorno social.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2017-11-09
Estudio comparativo de protocolos de comunicación de banda estrecha en líneas de potencia
Autor(es): Arroyo-Rodriguez, Xavier; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo;
El desarrollo de sistemas de comunicación a través de la línea de potencia (PLC) es una tecnología flexible que, en ocasiones, es el único medio para llegar a poblaciones con escaso acceso a otros servicios
de telecomunicación. Las comunicaciones PLC a través de la infraestructura existente ofrecen la oportunidad para proveer servicios en poblaciones y lugares remotos, lo que potencialmente puede contribuir
en la reducción de la brecha digital. Por otro lado, el acceso a sistemas de telecomunicación en lugares remotos es una oportunidad para proponer esquemas de instrumentación y control, por ejemplo, de
variables ambientales, que permita recabar datos para formar bases de información. Uno de los aspectos que juega un papel importante en la capacidad de comunicación ininterrumpida en un sistema PLC
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
19/29

es la homologación de protocolos de comunicación. En este trabajo se presenta un estudio comparativo entre diferentes protocolos de comunicación PLC, considerando características tales como: ancho de
banda, tolerancia a fallas, mecanismos de seguridad empleados, entre otros.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2017-11-08
ESTUDIO COMPARATIVO DE DISPOSITIVOS DIGITALES PARA EL MANEJO DE BASES DE DATOS EMPOTRADAS Y APLICACIONES PARA SMART METERS
Autor(es): Marín-Chávez, Christian Nivardy; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Lua-Vargas, Gabriela; Guerrero-Rodríguez, Néstor Francisco
En el presente proyecto de investigación se analizarán los distintos dispositivos que permitan una comunicación con los Smart Meters (medidores inteligentes), y la gestión de una base de datos empotrada,
de igual manera que faciliten el desarrollo de software y aplicaciones lo que permitirá una comunicación y sincronización entre dispositivos móviles y el almacenamiento de datos en la nube; dando como
resultado estadísticas y consultas sobre la medición energética en un hogar, lo cual resultará en un beneficio ambiental y energético tanto para las familias y empresas del país.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Electrónica)
2016-11-24
B-Learning como Estrategia en el Proceso de Enseñanza-Aprendizaje de las Matemáticas Discretas en la Educación Superior
Autor(es): Ortiz-Ortiz, Octavio; Jimenez-Murillo, José Alfredo; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
En este artículo se presenta una experiencia que hace uso de las nuevas tecnologías, mediante la creación de un escenario de aprendizaje en la modalidad b-learning, dentro de la Educación Superior para la
asignatura de Matemáticas Discretas en el grado de Ingeniería en Tecnologías de la Información y las Telecomunicaciones, que mediante la estrategia del aprendizaje flexible se realizó con un grupo de
experimentación, con el objetivo de reforzar el aprendizaje del tema “Lenguajes y Autómatas”, al final validado mediante el rigor del de análisis estadístico, se presentan los obtuvieron resultados altamente
significativos en los alumnos, donde se muestra el incremento tanto en la motivación, como en su rendimiento académico, en los alumnos del grupo de experimentación que hicieron uso de esta herramienta
de software en comparación con los alumnos del grupo de control que permanecieron con la clase tradicional.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2016-11-24
Importancia de la evaluación del examen de admisión
Autor(es): Jimenez-Murillo, José Alfredo; Ortiz-Ortiz, Octavio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Jimenez-Hernández, Paola
Este estudio consta de dos partes, la primera en donde se hace un análisis a fondo utilizando probabilidad y estadística del examen de admisión en una Institución de Educación Superior y la segunda en
donde se da seguimiento a la trayectoria de algunos estudiantes aceptados y dos alumnas que de acuerdo al examen de selección estaban rechazadas, a las cuales se les dio oportunidad de entrar debido al
presente estudio, y que al final resultaron los mejores promedios de la generación. Mostrando de esta manera la importancia de la evaluación en el examen de admisión. Los datos de la investigación son
primarios.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2016-11-24
EL APRENDIZAJE INVERTIDO Y LA GAMIFICACIÓN EN EL MEJORAMIENTO DEL PROCESO DE ENSEÑANZA-APRENDIZAJE DE PROGRAMACIÓN
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Jimenez-Murillo, Jose Alfredo; Ortiz-Ortiz, Octavio
La Asignatura de Fundamentos de Programación es a nivel nacional la asignatura que tiene mayores índices de reprobación en el primer semestre de prácticamente todas las carreras de Computación y en el
Tecnológico Nacional de México no es la excepción. Esto se debe principalmente a su alto nivel de abstracción lógico-matemática y a las formas tradicionales de enseñanza-aprendizaje. Por este motivo, es
sumamente importante tener una metodología y recursos didácticos apropiados que ayuden a mejorar el proceso de enseñanza-aprendizaje de esta fundamental asignatura en el área de las Ciencias
Computacionales. Para la realización de esta investigación, en primera instancia, se reestructuró el curso de Fundamentos de Programación para utilizar la Estrategia Didáctica de Aula Invertida (Aprendizaje
Invertido) a través de la realización de Actividades de Enseñanza-Aprendizaje Lúdicas (creación de Videojuegos) que permitan mejorar los índices de reprobación de la asignatura de Fundamentos de
Programación. Este trabajo presentan los resultados de aplicar una metodología de aprendizaje invertido y gamificación en la materia de Fundamentos de programación, en donde se corroboró que los
índices de reprobación disminuyeron de forma significativa en los grupos que se aplicó la metodología.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
2016-11-10
ESTUDIO COMPARATIVO DE MODULACIONES PARA COMUNICACIÓN EN LÍNEAS DE POTENCIA
Autor(es): Rivera-Figueroa, Jaime; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutierrez-Gnechi, Jose Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Ante el continuo incremento de demanda de energía eléctrica debido al crecimiento de la población, así como la integración de nuevas formas de generación, se hace necesaria la incorporación de nuevas
tecnologías de comunicación que faciliten la estabilidad y desempeño de la red. Un ejemplo de ello son los protocolos basados en PLC (Power Line Communication) que utilizan las redes instaladas para
establecer sus lazos de comunicación. En este documento se presenta un estudio de las modulaciones R0B0, BPSK, QPSK y 8PSK, para comparar la velocidad de transferencia de datos. Los resultados
obtenidos sugieren que las modulaciones QPSK y 8PSK presentan un mejor desempeño.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2016-11-09
Construction of Semantic Web Search Engine from a specific context
Autor(es): Martinez-Vallejo, Jaime; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ramos-Diaz, José Guadalupe
Accelerated growth of the Web has made difficult retrieving information although the current search engines algorithms implemented are very sophisticated. This paper proposes a methodology that makes use
of Semantic Web technologies to build search engine for a given context. The Semantic Web is made of a set of technologies, tools and standards that form the basis of an infrastructure to support the vision of
a Web associated with meaning. The proposed methodology was test in commercial contexts that provide some kind of product or service, such as restaurants and hotels. The information, which is used as a
starting point, is extracted from a Web site with thematic information or directory, from which the selected ontology is populated, this being built from scratch or by adapting some already existing ontology,
creating a semantic database; finally, a search application that searches and displays the information found with the specific criteria. The results show that a search engine that uses Semantic Web
technologies can achieve good results compared with traditional search engines.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2016-10-21
Characterization of Encoding Algorithms for Secure Communication in Mobile Devices
Autor(es): Ruiz-Lagunas, Juan Jesus; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Nuñez-Vieyra, Adrian; Antolino-Hernandez, Anastacio; Ferreira-Medina, Heberto; Alvarado-Zamora, Laura Nelly
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2016-03-30
Propuesta de metodología para la construcción de buscadores Web Semánticos de un contexto específico
Autor(es): Martinez-Vallejo, Jaime; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ramos-Diaz, José Guadalupe
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2016-03-02
Métodos y Técnicas utilizadas en la Seguridad en Dispositivos Móviles: una Revisión del Estado del Arte
Autor(es): Parrales-A, Esteban; Ruiz-Lagunas, Juan Jesus; Antolino-Hernandez, Anastacio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ferreira-Medina, Heberto
Los dispositivos móviles se caracterizan por ser sistemas de comunicación ampliamente difundidos, debido a su fácil acceso, conectividad y versatilidad. Tales dispositivos cuentan con sistemas operativos
similares a una PC y tienen la ventaja del uso de redes geográficamente distribuidas a nivel global, lo cual los hace vulnerables a riesgos derivados del manejo de información; por ejemplo virus o ataques
informáticos. Las limitaciones que tienen estos se deben a los recursos técnicos de su diseño y a su arquitectura. La rápida evolución y su uso masivo han originado que estén en constante amenaza
informática. Un problema que presenta el desarrollo de aplicaciones móviles es que hay una gran variedad de plataformas en donde cada una tiene características particulares que los hacen vulnerables e
incluso un blanco perfecto de los hackers. Estos utilizan la arquitectura cliente/servidor como la principal forma de comunicación, ya que separa el procesamiento entre dos entidades en una red, donde los
clientes son principalmente dispositivos móviles que requieren esquemas de comunicación confiables y el servidor (donde reside la información) generalmente es un sistema basado en hardware no móvil
(también con problemas de seguridad) y la red es el medio público que transporta la información y también requiere de un tratamiento especial para garantizar la seguridad. Esta propuesta de investigación
analiza las técnicas y los modelos de criptografía usados en las aplicaciones móviles (APPs). Se concluye que hacen faltas técnicas y metodologías que propongan esquemas de seguridad en la transmisión
de información, en el contexto de la ubicuidad.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Computación)
2015-10-27
Hacia la comparación precisa de productos a partir de fuentes distintas de datos en la Web
Autor(es): Ramos-Diaz, J.Guadalupe; Solís, Ricardo A.; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Moctezuma, Luis Alfredo; Carrillo, Maya
http://lke.cs.buap.mx/
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Creación; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2015-09-24
Prototipo para la Generación Automática de Horarios Académicos en el Instituto Tecnológico del Valle de Morelia
Autor(es): Rodriguez-Maya, Noel Enrique; Flores-Romero, Juan Jose; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
20/29

PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2013-10-15
REFACTORIZACION AUTOMATICA DE PAGINAS WEB PARA SU CORRECTA VISUALIZACION EN DISPOSITIVOS MOVILES A TRAVES DEL USO DE METADATOS
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Aguilar-Magaña, Ignacio
El ISBN quedo de darlo la DGEST y creo hasta la fecha no hay
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2013-10-15
FRAGMENTADOR AUTOMATICO DE PAGINAS WEB PARA SU CORRECTA VISUALIZACION EN DISPOSITIVOS MOVILES
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Aguilar-Magaña, Ignacio
DGEST quedo en dar registro de ISBN, hasta la fecha creo que no hay
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2011-06-21
COMPARATIVA DE FORMATOS DE LIBROS ELECTRÓNICOS PARA DISPOSITIVOS MÓVILES
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas. Juan Carlos; Moreno-Reyes, Hugo; Zepeda-Florían, José María; Vargas-Rivera, Ruth; Ferreira-Medina, Heberto
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2010-10-17
A SURVEY OF PROJECT SCHEDULING PROBLEM (PSP)
Autor(es): Ruiz-Vanoye, Jorge Alberto; Diaz-Parra, Ocotlán; Zavala, José-C; Fuentes-Penna, Alejandro; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
Prototipo
2023-10-10
EIT (Electrical Impedance Tomography) Measurement System
Autor(es): Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo; Gutiérrez-López, Marcos; Robledo-Ayala, Israel Alejandro
Sistema de medición de impedancia por tomagría eléctrica
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
21/29

Tesis dirigida
2025-06-02
Contención de Ataques Cibernéticos en Redes Definidas por Software (SDN) Utilizando un Esquema Virtualizado
Autor(es): Martínez-Ávila, Syndel Kaherí; Antolino-Hernández, Anastacio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Tesis de Maestría en Sistemas Computacionales
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2025-06-02
Maestría: "Sistema multimodal basado en procesamiento de lenguaje natural para la captura y consulta de información en base de datos médicas"
Autor(es): Mata-Martinez, Pedro; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Tesis de maestría
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2025-06-02
Sistema Multimodal Basado en Procesamiento de Lenguaje Naturla Para la Captura y Consulta de Información en Base de Datos Médicas
Autor(es): Mata-Martínez, Pedro; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Tesis de maestría en desarrollo
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2025-06-02
SISTEMA MULTIMODAL BASADO EN PROCESAMIENTO DE LENGUAJE NATURAL PARA LA CAPTURA Y CONSULTA DE INFORMACIÓN EN BASE DE DATOS MÉDICAS
Autor(es): Mata-Martínez, Pedro
Tesis de maestría
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2024-11-29
Sistema de Detección de Instrusos en Dispositivos IoT Utilizados en Clasificación de Perturbaciones de Calidad de la Energía
Autor(es): Árzate-Rueda, Berenice; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Tesis de Maestría en Ciencias en Ingeniería Electrónica
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2023-06-14
Implementación de un Sistema de Gestión de Seguridad Informática del Centro de Datos de la Secretaría Ejecutiva del Sistema Estatal Anti corrupción para
Garantizar la Integridad de la Información
Autor(es): Pureco-Pedraza, Lizbeth; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Antolino-Hernández, Anastacio
Tesis de Maestría en Sistemas Computacionales
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2023-06-14
Diseño e implementación de una Red para Aplicaciones de Internet de las cosas en el Instituto Tecnológico Superior De Uruapan
Autor(es): Zambrano-Rodríguez, Carlos; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ferreira-MEdina, Heberto
Tesis de Maestría en Sistemas Computacionales del Instituto Tecnológico de Morelia en Colaboración con el Instituto Tecnológico Superior de Uruapan
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2022-11-14
DETECCIÓN NO INTRUSIVA DE CONSUMO ELÉCTRICO DE ELECTRODOMÉSTICOS USANDO UN MEDIDOR INTELIGENTE BASADO EN FIRMA DE CARGAS
Autor(es): Mier-Urbina, Sergio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
Implementar un algoritmo del método NILM adecuándolo para medidores inteligentes que permita la detección y datos de consumo de los diferentes dispositivos eléctricos conectados a una misma línea de
consumo energético, lo cual permita el uso eficiente de energía de los consumidores.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2022-06-17
ESTUDIO DE TÉCNICAS CRIPTOGRÁFICAS DE CLAVE PÚBLICA PARA AUTENTICACIÓN EN DISPOSITIVOS EMBEBIDOS PARA REDES ELÉCTRICAS INTELIGENTES
Autor(es): Zavala-Diaz, Jonathan; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Tesis de Maestría en Ciencias en Ingeniería Electrónica en el Instituto Tecnológico de Morelia
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2022-06-08
SISTEMA DE INGESTA DE DATOS PARA LA INTEGRACIÓN E INTEROPERABILIDAD DE BASE DE DATOS HOSPITALARIOS
Autor(es): Melchor-Uceda, Iran; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
Contribuir con un modelo de ingesta de datos, amigable, que permita administrar, consultar y manejar la información generada al ofrecer un servicio de salud, facilitando labores de diagnóstico clínico,
tratamiento y seguimiento de pacientes, logrando una conectividad entre los diferentes dispositivos biomédicos, usables, IoT, sensores y actuadores, a fin de estructurar y almacenar dicha información una
arquitectura de datos escalable, interoperable y en tiempo real que permita monitorear y visualizar los datos de salud de los pacientes de forma segura y confiable abatiendo costos de operación, y aplicando
las TIC.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2022-06-08
Integración e Interoperabilidad de Datos Hospitalarios en Linea y en Tiempo Real
Autor(es): Lazo-Gutiérrez, Gabriel de Jesús; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Desarrollo e implementación de un lago de datos hospitalarios que permita la integración y almacenamiento de datos provenientes de fuentes heterogeneas como sensores, usables y dispositivos biomédicos
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2022-01-06
Modelos de Pronóstico de Consumo de Energía en la Ciudad de Morelia, Michoacán, México
Autor(es): Alemán-Duarte, Marisol; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Tesis de Maestría en Ciencias en Ingeniería Electrónica
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2022-01-06
Modelo de Pronóstico para Identificación de Consumos Eléctricos Anómalos en un Medidor Eléctrico Inteligente
Autor(es): Alemán-Duarte, Marisol; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Diseño e implementación de un modelo de pronóstico que permita detectar consumos anómalos de electricidad a través de un medidor inteligente
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2021-11-09
Analítica de datos en medidores inteligentes para determinar patrones de consumo/producción para la toma de decisiones energéticas efectivas
Autor(es): Jiménez-Toscano, Eréndira del Carmen; Pérez-Olán, Gregorio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Titulación por memorias de residencias profesionales que derivo del proyecto anterior y a su vez de un programa Delfin
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2020-02-03
Estudio Comparativo de Bases de Datos Empotradas para Aplicaciones de Medidores Inteligentes
Autor(es): Marín-Chávez; Cristhian Nivardy; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Tesis de Maestría en Ciencias en Ing. Electrónica del Instituto Tecnológico de Morelia
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Bases de datos)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
22/29

2019-12-18
Estudio de Vulnerabilidades a Nivel Físico y de Enlace en Protocolos G3-PLC y PRIME-PLC para Comunicación por Línea de Potencia
Autor(es): Arroyo-Rodríguez, Xavier; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Estudio de Vulnerabilidades a Nivel Físico y de Enlace en Protocolos G3-PLC y PRIME-PLC para Comunicación por Línea de Potencia
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Electrónica)
Arquitectura multinivel de Comunicación y Procesamiento de Datos en Sistemas de Medición Agrovoltaicos
Autor(es): Martínez-Mondragon, Gustavo; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
Tesis de Maestría en Ciencias en Ingeniería Electrónica
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Alimentos → Agricultura)
Desarrollo de un algoritmo para cálculo de bolo de insulina a través de la identificación de patrones en los datos de registros diarios de pacientes con
diabetes tipo 1 por medio de aprendizaje automático y aplicación de inteligencia artificial
Autor(es): Contreras-Jiménez, Rocío; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen
La DBT1, es una enfermedad que principalmente es detectada en la niñez o adolescencia, por lo general antes de los 35 años, los pacientes al ya no poder producir la insulina deben aprender a tener un
estilo de vida que implica: Mantener una adecuada hidratación, mantener una dieta saludable, aplicarse las dosis adecuadas de insulina, conforme a la cantidad de carbohidratos consumidos, el ejercicio que
se realiza, la hidratación, y muchos otros factores que pueden afectar los niveles de glucosa, se han identificado hasta 42 factores, de los cuáles no todos son medibles [1] y realizar actividad física. Sin
embargo, aun tratando de llevar de la mejor manera posible estos cuatro factores, en muchas ocasiones no es posible lograr que la glucosa postprandial (medición realizada dos horas después de cada
comida) se encuentre dentro del rango normal de 70 a 180 mg/dl en un paciente con DBT1. Lo anterior se debe a que pueden influir aspectos hormonales, estados de ánimo, estrés, la temperatura del medio
ambiente, interacciones medicamentosas, la temperatura del paciente, si está enfermo, incluso su edad, dado que puede afectarse por la hormona del crecimiento, lo cual no es medible. Es por ello por lo que
se busca tener la mayor cantidad de datos posible, de aquellos que pueden ser medibles por el paciente o se puedan obtener del entorno, con la finalidad de generar un modelo matemático, a través de la
aplicación de modelos de Machine Learning e Inteligencia Artificial a datos recabados ya sea de pacientes reales o de Datasets (conjuntos de datos) públicos, para optimizar el cálculo del bolo de insulina
requerido para los alimentos del paciente sin riesgos de hiperglicemias o hipoglicemias posteriores.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural para la Consulta de Información en un Lago de Datos Hospitalario
Autor(es): Zavala-Diaz, Jonathan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Tesis de Doctorado
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
Procesamiento de Lenguaje Natural para la Consulta de Información en un Lago de Datos Hospitalario
Autor(es): Zavala-Díaz, Jonathan
Tesis Doctoral
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
“METODOLOGÍA PARA EL DESARROLLO DE LAGOS DE DATOS CON STREAMING DE DATOS PARA APLICACIONES DE IOT EN REDES ELÉCTRICAS INTELIGENTES
Autor(es): Ruíz-Martinez, Luis Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Desarrollo estructurado de un lago de datos para aplicaciones en la red eléctrica inteligente usando dispositivos IoT
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
Metodología para el Robustecimiento de Seguridad en Computadoras de Tarjetas Simples
Autor(es): Zavala-Ramos, Juan Carlos; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Se pretende desarrollar una metodología para robustecer la seguridad de las placas de computadoras más generales para dispositivos de Internet de las Cosas
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
23/29

Propiedad autoral
2026-07-24
APLICACIÓN MÓVIL: SISTEMA DE GESTIÓN, REGISTRO Y SEGUIMIENTO PARA PACIENTES CON DIABETES TIPO 1 TECHANI APP
Autor(es): Contreras-Jimenez, Rocío; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
Aplicación Móvil para Diabetes Tipo I y II
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2026-04-07
PLOTEIT104
Autor(es): Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro
Programa para graficar tomas de impendancia eléctrica en matrices de 104x104
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2026-04-07
PLOTEIT464
Autor(es): Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro
Programa para graficar tomas de impendancia electrica en 64 bits
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2026-02-11
Techani 2: Sistema de Gestión, Registro y Seguimiento para Pacientes con Diabetes Tipo 1
Autor(es): Contreras-Jimenez, Rocio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo; Arroyo-Cervantes, Andres; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio;
Gallardo-Magaña
Software para el registro, control y seguimiento de pacientes con diabetes Tipo 1
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2024-08-01
EITQUALITYFOR464X86
Autor(es): GUTIÉRREZ-GNECCHI, JOSÉ ANTONIO; OLIVARES-ROJAS, JUAN CARLOS; REYES-ARCHUNDIA. ENRIQUE; RODRÍGUEZ-HERREJÓN, JAVIER ALEJANDRO
Softare de reconstrucción de imágenes para sistema de tomografía de impedancia eléctrica matriz de 64 arquitectura x86
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2024-08-01
EITQUALITYFOR464X64
Autor(es): GUTIÉRREZ-GNECCHI, JOSE ANTONIO; OLIVARES-ROJAS, JUAN CARLOS; REYES-ARCHUNDIA, ENRIQUE; RODRÍGUEZ-HERREJÓN, JAVIER ALEJANDRO
Software de reconstrucción de imágenes del sistema de tomografía por impedancia eléctrica matriz de 64 arquitectura x64
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2024-08-01
EITQUALITYFOR104X86
Autor(es): GUTIÉRREZ-GNECCHI, JOSÉ ANTONIO; OLIVARES-ROJAS, JUAN CARLOS; REYES-ARCHUNDIA, ENRIQUE; RODRÍGUEZ-HERREJÓN, JAVIER ALEJANDRO
Software de reconstrucción de imágenes de sistema de tomografía por impedancia eléctrica matriz de 104 arquitectura x86
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2024-08-01
EITQUALITYFOR104X64
Autor(es): GUTIÉRREZ-GNECCHI, JOSÉ ANTONIO; OLIVARES-ROJAS, JUAN CARLOS; REYES-ARCHUNDIA, ENRIQUE; RODRÍGUEZ-HERREJÓN, JAVIER ALEJANDRO
Software de reconstrucción de imagenes de sistema de tomografía por impedancia eléctrica matriz 104 arquitectura x64
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2024-08-01
EITQUALITYFOR464X86
Autor(es): Gutiérrez Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes Archundia, Enrique; Rodríguez Herrejón Javier Alejandro
Software de reconstrucción de imágenes por impedancia eléctrica matrices de 64 bits en arquitectura x86
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2024-08-01
EITQUALITYFOR464X64
Autor(es): Gutiérrez Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes Archundia, Enrique; Rodríguez Herrejón Javier Alejandro
Software de reconstrucción de imagenes por ETS a 64 bits
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2024-08-01
EITQUALITYFOR104X86
Autor(es): Gutiérrez Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes Archundia, Enrique; Rodríguez Herrejón Javier Alejandro
Software de reconstrucción de imágenes por tomografía de impedancia electrica versión x86
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2024-08-01
EITQUALITYFOR104X64
Autor(es): Gutiérrez Gnecchi, José Antonio; Olivares Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes Archundia, Enrique; Rodríguez Herrejón Javier Alejandro
Programa de Tomografía por Impedancia Eléctrica plataforma x64
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
24/29

Otro
2026-11-13
Poster: DEVELOPMENT OF AN ALGORITHM FOR THE CALCULATION OF INSULIN BOLUS TROUGH THE IDENTIFICATION OF PATTERNS IN THE DATA FROM DAILY
RECORDS OF PATIENTS WHIT TYPE 1 DIABETES
Autor(es): Rocío Contreras Jiménez, Juan Carlos Olivares Rojas, Adrian del Carmen Téllez Anguiano
Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) is an autoimmune disease, in which the beta cells of the pancreas are destroyed, given the impossibility of producing insulin, the patient must receive it externally. Additionally, the
patient must lead a healthy lifestyle to maintain their glucose levels within the recommended range. Currently, there have been many technological advances to monitor and control of diabetes, the application
of artificial intelligence through the development of algorithms for calculation of insulin bolus, which allow greater accuracy and fewer incidences of hypoglycemia in the patient is a great advance. In this article,
the proposal for an insulin bolus calculation integrated system is presented, which considers the account of carbohydrates in food, the ratio, pandrial glucose and active insulin; besides other factors such as
exercise, mood and hormonal aspects such as the menstrual cycle, in order to establish specific patterns for each patient, and through machine learning, be able to generate bolus calculations that prevent
hypoglycemia and keep the patient in range.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2026-01-01
Proyecto: Detección automática de intrusos en ambientes controlados, utilizando sistemas de videovigilancia y aprendizaje automático
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Núñez-Vieyra, Adrián; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo
Proyecto con Financiamiento del TecNM
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2026-01-01
Proyecto: Procesamiento y Clasificación de Señales Electromiográficas mediante Algoritmos de Aprendizaje Automático para el Control Inteligente de
Prótesis
Autor(es): Rodríguez-Herrejón, Javier Alejandro; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
Proyecto con Financiamiento TecNM
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2025-12-31
Proyecto: Modelo de inteligencia artificial dirigido por datos para el cálculo de bolo de insulina en pacientes con Diabetes Tipo 1
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Contreras-Jimenez, Rocio; Alcaraz-Chavez, Jesús Eduardo; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen
Identificar y analizar los diferentes factores que influyen en las mediciones glicémicas de pacientes con Diabetes Tipo 1, así como los efectos de estos en la glucosa postpandrial, con la finalidad de establecer
patrones de comportamiento individual que permitan desarrollar un algoritmo inteligente que se adapte a las necesidades individuales y ayuden a predecir el cálculo automático de bolo de insulina pandrial
necesario para disminuir al mínimo la cantidad de episodios de hiperglicemia e hipoglicemia, evitando así efectos secundarios de la falta de control glicémico a largo plazo, mejorando la calidad de vida del
paciente y disminuyendo significativamente los altos costos de complicaciones tanto para el paciente como para el sistema de salud público y las decisiones y riesgos con base en el análisis de datos
históricos del paciente y la aplicación de modelos de inteligencia artificial.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2025-12-31
Proyecto: Análisis y clasificación de señales electromiográficas para control de una ortesis activa
Autor(es): Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Martínez-Parrales, Ricardo
Determinar, mediante procesamiento de señales y análisis en tiempo y/o frecuencia, las características de las señales electromiográficas superficiales que permitan su clasificación relacionada con
movimiento, para coadyuvar al desarrollo de un sistema de control de una ortesis activa para brazo.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2025-12-05
Servicio social: apoyo a la investigación (la salud, web-móvil)
Autor(es): Zamudio-Damián, Oscar Kuricaveri; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Participó en el desarrollo de la página web y la app móvil
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2025-12-05
Servicio Social: "apoyo a la investigación (la salud, móvil)"
Autor(es): García-Lara, Omar; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Participó en el desarrollo de la app móvil
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2025-12-05
Servicio Social: "Servicio social: apoyo a la investigación (la salud, web)"
Autor(es): Martínez-Ambriz, Eladio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Participó en el desarrollo de la página web
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2025-11-04
Póster: Development of a Clinical Chatbot for Generating Preliminary Records Using Prompt Engineering on Open-Source Generative Language Models
Autor(es): Robles-Garcia, Diego; Zavala-Díaz, Jonathan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
The growing demand for healthcare services has revealed the need to optimize clinical workflows, particularly during the initial patient assessment. This project presents the development of a medical chatbot
designed to collect preliminary patient data through structured and adaptive questioning. The system integrates rule-based logic, prompt engineering, and large language models (LLMs) to generate
personalized next-question generation (NQG). Various LLMs-such as Mistral and Falcon-were evaluated for their ability to generate summaries and contextually relevant questions. Results show that hybrid
chatbots can streamline patient intake, reduce physician workload, and enhance the quality of early diagnosis. The proposed system demonstrates the viability of open-source models for building flexible,
intelligent clinical assistants, with future work focused on real-world validation and clinician feedback.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2025-11-04
Póster: Identifying Postprandial Glucose Determinants in Type 1 Diabetes Through Causal Inference and Directed Acyclic Graphs
Autor(es): Contreras-Jiménez, Rocío; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo
Type 1 Diabetes (T1DM) requires strict glucose control to avoid complications. A significant challenge is determining the optimal insulin bolus, as miscalculations can lead to hypo- or hyperglycemia. This study
explores the use of Directed Acyclic Graphs (DAGs) to model causal relationships influencing postprandial glucose. Using the HUPA-UCM dataset (25 patients with T1DM, including glucose, insulin, activity,
and dietary data), three DAG models were developed: knowledge-based (DAG1), data- driven (DAG2), and expertise-adjusted (DAG3). Causal inference with DoWhy produced significant estimates of the
bolus effect on postprandial glucose. Results indicate that each additional insulin unit reduces glucose from −1.30 mg/dL (DAG1) to −0.78 mg/dL (DAG2/DAG3). Robustness tests confirmed stability of
estimates despite inclusion of spurious confounders (p > 0.90). These findings suggest DAGs are a reliable framework for identifying key factors in glycemic response and may represent a promising alternative
to traditional machine learning approaches for future insulin dosing systems.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2025-04-04
Proyecto: Modelo de inteligencia artificial dirigido por datos para el cálculo de bolo de insulina en pacientes con Diabetes Tipo 1
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Contreras-Jiménez, Rocío; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo
Proyecto de Investigación 2025 con Financiamiento del TecNM
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2025-04-04
Proyecto: Análisis y clasificación de señales electromiográficas para control de una ortesis activa
Autor(es): Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Martínez-Parrales, Ricardo
Proyecto de Investigación 2025 con financiamiento del TecNM
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
25/29

2024-12-11
Residencia: Robot Móvil para Vigilancia y detección de intrusos
Autor(es): Ortiz-Garcia, Samanta Gabriela; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Alcaraz-Chávez, Jesús Eduardo
Diseño de robot móvil para videovigilancia
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2024-10-18
Residencias: "Análisis de los Datos en Base de Datos Médicas"
Autor(es): Sánchez-Pérez, Pavel; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencias Profesionales
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2024-08-05
Delfín: "CIENCIA DE DATOS APLICADA A TRAVÉS DE ALGORITMOS DE APRENDIZAJE SUPERVISADO Y VECINOS MÁS CERCANOS PARA BASE DE DATOS MÉDICA"
Autor(es): Carrillo-Castro, Cynthia Edith; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Estancia de investigación de verano del programa delfín
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2024-08-05
Delfin: "ANÁLISIS DE BASES DE DATOS MÉDICAS APLICANDO REGRESIÓN LOGÍSTICA"
Autor(es): Barajas-Rivera, Jesús Donato; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Estancia de investigación de verano del programa delfín
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2024-08-05
Delfín: ""ANALISIS DE BASES DE DATOS MEDICA/REGRESION SIMPLE Y MULTIPLE"
Autor(es): Rafael-Aguilera, Cristofer; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Estancia de investigación del programa Delfín
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2024-08-05
Delfin: "ANÁLISIS DE BASE DE DATOS MÉDICAS CON IMPLEMENTACIÓN DE RED NEURONAL MLP (PERCEPTRÓN MULTICAPA)"
Autor(es): Sánchez-Pérez, Pavel; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Estancia de investigación programa delfin que derivó en Residencias Profesionales
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2024-01-01
Proyecto: Interfaz multimodal para la captura de expediente clínico através del modelado de dialogo de lenguaje natural paciente médico
Autor(es): González-Murueta, Johan Walter; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ramos Díaz, J. Guadalupe
Proyecto de investigación con financiamiento TecNM
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Bases de datos)
2023-12-15
Residencia: Medidores Inteligentes
Autor(es): Martínez-Muñoz, Yeray Valdimir; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencias de un medidor inteligente usando lenguaje natural para la consulta de información
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2023-12-15
Residencias: Procesamiento de lenguaje natural para la consulta de informacion sobre diabetes en un lago de datos hospitalario con implementación de la api
de chat gpt
Autor(es): Mascote-Páramo, Jennifer; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencias
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2023-12-15
Residencia: DESARROLLO E IMPLEMENTACIÓN DE UNA INTERFAZ DE LENGUAJE NATURAL PARA LA CONSULTA DE INFORMACIÓN SOBRE DIABETES EN UN LAGO DE
DATOS HOSPITALARIO
Autor(es): Cortes-Morales Ramiro; Olivares-Rojas Juan Carlos
Residencias
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2023-11-13
Poster: Development of a Natural Language Processing Interface for Query and Analysis of Clinical Notes in a Hospital Data Lake
Autor(es): Zavala-Diaz, Jonathan; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
The proliferation of unstructured data in electronic health records poses a critical challenge to healthcare. This project addresses the gap in care for Spanish-speaking users, focusing on data related to
diabetes. Our goal is to develop a specialized natural language processing interface to efficiently access medical information. Our research involves the creation of a question and answer (Q&A) model in
Spanish, focused on the clinical notes of diabetic patients. We have collected a substantial data set of 503,403 clinical notes in Spanish, converting them for analysis. Preliminary findings indicate variations in
note length and number of notes per patient. Manual annotation is required to identify diabetes-related notes. Our initial research evaluated biomedical devices, analyzing their performance in speech-to-text
and text-to-speech applications, vital to our multimodal medical tool. Our ongoing research aims to close the language gap, providing a valuable resource for Spanish-speaking medical users and professionals
dealing with diabetes-related care.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2023-11-13
Póster: AUTOMATIC DETECTION OF THREATENING ENVIRONMENTS THROUGH A NEIGHBORHOOD VIDEO SURVEILLANCE NETWORK
Autor(es): Núñez-Vieyra, Adrián; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Méndez-Patiño, Arturo
Video surveillance systems are usually a monitoring and analysis tool to clarify events of different kinds: traffic accidents, assaults on public roads, robberies and break-ins on private property, etc. However,
their efficiency has been reduced because the participation of people is still necessary for their operation why they end up becoming an extensive database whose review is usually exhausting. Another
problem is the saturation of false positives in the alerts which are triggered by the slightest movement or change in lighting. And finally, one of the most important problems, is that their usefulness remains until
the crime has ocurred. In this project, a methodology and a framework are proposed for the implementation of a neighborhood video surveillance network with predictive capabilities, which detects, classifies
and records potential threats before a crime occurs.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Multimedia)
2023-08-04
Estancia: ANÁLISIS DE NARRATIVAS MÉDICAS EN EL IDIOMA ESPAÑOL PARA OBTENER INFORMACIÓN ESTADÍSTICA DE PATRONES FRECUENTES EN CONJUNTO DE DATOS
MÉDICOS USANDO DISPOSITIVOS EMBEBIDOS.
Autor(es): Concha-Quezada Andrik-Arturo; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Estancia de investigación proyecto Delfin
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2023-08-04
Estancia: INTERFAZ WEB PARA CONSULTA DE TARIFAS DE CONSUMO ELÉCTRICO
Autor(es): Martínez-Muñoz, Yeray Valdimir; Olivares-Rojas Juan Carlos
Estancia de investigación proyecto Delfín
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
26/29

2023-08-04
Estancia: TÉCNICAS DE PROCESAMIENTO DE LENGUAJE NATURAL Y ALGORITMOS DE CONVERSIÓN DE VOZ Y TEXTO EN EL DESARROLLO DE UN SISTEMA INTELIGENTE
PARA EL APOYO MÉDICO
Autor(es): Comparán-Pantoja Francisco; Olivares-Rojas Juan Carlos
Estancia de Investigación Programa Delfín
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2023-06-03
Residencias: SISTEMA DE INTUICIÓN DE PACIENTES PREDIABÉTICOS A TRAVÉS DEL ANÁLISIS DE DATOS DE EXPEDIENTES CLÍNICOS
Autor(es): Villafuerte-Zavala, Erick Daniel; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencias Profesionales
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2023-01-05
Residencia: Construcción de un Firewall usando un Sistema Embebido para aplicaciones de Agrovoltaica"
Autor(es): Andrade-González, Juan Carlos; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencia Profesional Ingeniería en Sistemas Computacionales
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2022-12-31
Proyecto: Adquisición, procesamiento y análisis de variables físicas y funcionales para compensación de medición no invasiva de glucosa
Autor(es): Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; García-Ramírez, María del Carmen
Proyecto de Investigación con Financiamiento del TecNM
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Instrumentación biomédica)
2022-12-31
Proyecto: Arquitectura Multi-nivel de Medición Inteligente para Aplicaciones de Agrovoltaica Utilizando Redes Inalámbricas de Área Extensa de Bajo
Consumo Energético
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
Proyecto de Investigación con Financiamiento del TecNM 2022
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Alimentos → Agricultura)
2022-12-20
Residencia: Desarrollo de software en arquitectura multinivel de medición inteligente para aplicaciones de agrovoltaica utilizando redes inalámbricas de
área extensa de bajo consumo energético
Autor(es): Vanegas-Carreon, Irving Alexis; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencias Profesionales de Ingeniería en Sistemas Computacionales
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2022-12-16
Residencia: Ciberseguridad en arquitectura multinivel de medición inteligente para aplicaciones de agrovoltaica utilizando redes inalámbricas de área
extensa de bajo consumo energético
Autor(es): Vallejo-García, Geovanni Jesús; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ruíz-Lagunas, Juan Jesús
Residencia Profesional de Ingeniería en Sistemas Computacionales
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2022-11-17
Poster Dialog modeling of domain specific cognitive assistants
Autor(es): Ramos-Diaz, J. Guadalupe; Ruiz-Lagunas, Juan Jesus; Nuñez-Vieyra, Adrian; Cuin-Jacuinde, Jose Manuel;Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Intelligent virtual assistants of software are becoming more common. Frequently, the communication interface is dialogue which is expressed in natural language. When there are conversations with multiple
bifurcations in the flow of communication, the representation and documentation is complex. In this sense, there is a lack of formalities that allow a dialogue to be accurately represented and, based on them, to
proceed with its programming in an industrial framework. We propose the use of finite state machines to model complex dialogues. We introduce a formal model for the representation of dialogue and its
mapping to a real assistant, using an industrial framework. We believe that our approach will make it easier to design and to program assistants with complex interaction, enabling better adoption of them.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2021-07-10
Residencia: Diseño de un Medidor Inteligente de Energía Eléctrica
Autor(es): Cortes-García, Nancy; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Maya-Flores, Baldemar; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Desarrollo de un medidor inteligente a través de computadoras de tarjeta simple y sensores de energía
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2021-07-01
Residencia: Arquitectura de un Sistema de Ingesta de Datos
Autor(es): Aguilar-Barrios, Humberto; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Alfaro-García, Tarcisio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2021-03-10
Proyecto: Multi-modality instrumentation for optimal management of irrigation water resources
Autor(es): Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriana del Carmen, Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Proyecto de Investigación financiado por el british council a través del fondo Newton.
PUBLICADO EN: Reino Unido; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Medio Ambiente → Agua)
2021-02-28
SS: Apoyo Investigación Criptografía Ligera para Redes Eléctricas Inteligentes
Autor(es): Gutierrez-Rubio, Isaí; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Desarrollo de algoritmos criptográficos ligeros para dispositivos IoT en redes eléctricas inteligentes como medidores inteligentes
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Tecnologías de la información para el aprendizaje)
2021-01-31
Residencia: Analítica de datos en medidores inteligentes para determinar patrones de consumo/producción para la toma de decisiones energéticas efectivas
Autor(es): Jimenez-Toscano, Eréndira del Carmen; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Desarrollo de software en python para el análisis de datos de medidores inteligentes para identificar patrones de consumo/producción que sirvan de base para la toma de decisiones energéticas efectivas
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2021-01-01
Proyecto: Sistema de Medición Inteligente, Transactivo y Desagregado de Consumo/Producción de Energía Eléctrica
Autor(es): Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
La electricidad es una comodidad esencial para soportar nuestras actividades diarias. Con el incremento competitivo y costos de energía por la industria, se producen nuevos valores y oportunidades de
entrega de energía eléctrica hacia los clientes. Una de estas nuevas oportunidades son los vehículos eléctricos y la producción de energía distribuida por fuentes renovables como paneles fotovoltaicos y
aerogeneradores directamente desde las instalaciones de los usuarios finales. Con la llegada de vehículos eléctricos, sistemas de almacenamiento de energía y otras tecnologías de gestión de energía
eléctrica, se están presentando diversos retos y oportunidades en el sistema eléctrico de potencia a nivel mundial. Por ejemplo, bajo el esquema tradicional de facturación de energía eléctrica, la energía
eléctrica tiene que ser consumida donde se necesita por lo que los usuarios finales no podrían cargar sus vehículos eléctricos o cualquier otra carga eléctrica de alto consumo en distintos puntos (por ejemplo,
la casa de un familiar) si esta no se factura al usuario correcto (esto debido al alto consumo de energía eléctrica que lo hace costoso). Para lograr la movilidad eléctrica, se deben resolver nuevos desafíos,
como la medición inteligente del consumo de energía y la ciberseguridad de estas mediciones. Por otra parte, la proliferación de microgeneración por parte de los consumidores finales los ha convertido en
pequeños productores de electricidad por lo que con el abaratamiento de las fuentes de energía distribuida renovable su rol ha cambiado a ser prosumidores (productores-consumidores) en donde los
usuarios finales pueden generar su propia energía eléctrica y debido a la gran intermitencia de las energías limpias también pueden consumir energía. A su vez, el excedente de eléctrica puede ser
comercializado a otros consumidores, a las empresas suministradores y a otros participantes del mercado eléctrico a través del concepto de energía transactiva. El presente trabajo propone el desarrollo de
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
27/29

un prototipo de sistemas de medición inteligente basado en un modelo económico de comercialización de energía eléctrica transactiva que utiliza blockchain y otros mecanismos de seguridad para lograr la
movilidad eléctrica promoviendo la eficiencia energética a través de la desagregación del consumo y/o producción eléctrica de cada uno de los dispositivos conectados a la microred eléctrica de los hogares,
industrias o comercios.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
2021-01-01
Proyecto: Arquitectura de Lago de Datos para Integración e Interoperabilidad de Bases de Datos Hospitalarias en Tiempo Real
Autor(es): García-Ramirez, María del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio
La salud de las personas es una de las principales prioridades de los gobiernos hoy en día y su cuidado es de suma importancia para el bienestar de la sociedad. Particularmente la seguridad social tiene
como uno de sus elementos fundamentales el cuidado de la salud de sus derechohabientes. En los últimos años, el uso de las Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones (TICs) ha permeado a
prácticamente cualquier actividad humana revolucionando la forma en como vivimos. Esta transformación no solo está revolucionando la industria en lo que se ha pasado a denominar Industria 4.0, sino que
otros sectores como el energético, económico y principalmente la salud han sido enormemente beneficiados. En la llamada Salud 4.0 se pretende integrar los diversos sistemas ciber físicos compuesto por las
personas, objetos, tecnologías y datos en un ente único funcional que permita monitorear la salud de los pacientes en todo momento y en cualquier lugar. Sin embargo, aún existen muchos retos por vencer
entre los que destacan la falta de integración de los datos provenientes de diversas fuentes (dispositivos biomédicos, usables, sistemas de información médica) y de diversas entidades; sumado a que,
también existen poca interoperabilidad de los datos de las fuentes citadas. Por si fuera poco, el volumen y la velocidad con la que se generan los datos requiere de esquemas de datos robustos, seguros (ya
que la información de salud es bastante sensible y crítica) y escalables que permitan el procesamiento de los datos de salud para la toma de decisiones vitales de salud como diagnóstico, prevención y sobre
todo construcción de políticas de salud públicas que permitan el bienestar de la sociedad. El presente proyecto presenta una propuesta de una arquitectura de lago de datos que permitirá la adecuada
integración e interoperabilidad de los datos de salud de las diversas fuentes en que se genera en tiempo real para ayudar en los procesos de monitoreo, control, diagnóstico y prevención de la salud de los
pacientes.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2020-12-31
Proyecto: Modelos de Aprendizaje Máquina para la Detección de Consumos/Producción Anómalos de Energía Eléctrica utilizando una Arquitectura de
Cómputo en la Niebla
Autor(es): Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Medio Ambiente → Eficiencia energética)
2019-12-31
Proyecto: Analítica de datos en medidores inteligentes para determinar patrones de consumo/producción para mejorar la eficiencia energética y evitar robo
de energía
Autor(es): González-Murueta, Joahn Walter; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
Proyecto de investigación TecNM
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2019-12-21
Residencia Profesional: MODELO DE PREDICCIÓN DE LECTURAS DE CONSUMO/PRODUCCIÓN DE ENERGÍA ELÉCTRICA ANÓMALOS
Autor(es): Álvarez-Ancelmo, María Liliana; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Rodríguez-Maya, Noel Enríque
Modelos de pronósticos de energía eléctrica para evitar fraudes
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Minería de datos)
2019-12-20
Residencia Profesional: Analítica de Datos en Medidores Inteligentes para Determinar Patrones de Consumo/Producción para Mejorar la Eficiencia Energética
y Evitar Robo de Energía
Autor(es): Carrillo-Villanueva, Sergio Adrián; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencias profesionales relacionadas al análisis de datos con Blockchain
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2019-08-30
Póster: Analítica de Datos en Medidores Inteligentes para la Detección de Robo de Energía
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Gutiérrez-Gnecchi, José Antonio; González-Murueta, Johan Walter; Téllez-Anguiano, Adriada del Carmen
El robo de energía es la principal pérdida no técnica de las empresas suministradoras del servicio eléctrico. Con la introducción de medidores inteligentes se registran las lecturas de medición del consumo y
producción de energía eléctrica deforma más periódica, lo cual con lleva al posterior uso de esta información. En este trabajo se presenta la analítica de datos de las lecturas de consumo/producción de
energía eléctrica de medidores inteligentes que permite determinar un patrón de consumo/producción de energía eléctrica para identificar si los consumos/producción de energía eléctrica pueden ser
considerados como robo de energía.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2019-08-02
Delfin 2019: Analítica de datos para pronóstico de robo de energía usando medidores inteligentes (Sistemas)
Autor(es): Jimenez-Toscano, Eréndira del Carmen; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Estancia de investigación del programa Delfin 2019
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2019-08-02
Delfin 2019: Analítica de datos para pronóstico de robo de energía usando medidores inteligentes (Industrial)
Autor(es): Loya-Ayala, Yazmín Monserrat; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Estancia en el programa Delfin 2019
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Manufactura → Eléctrica)
2018-12-20
Residencia Profesional: "Implementación de Cadena de Bloques usando HyperLedger para Transacciones de Consumo Eléctrico"
Autor(es): Ortega-Contreras, Julio Cesar; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Ferreira-Medina, Heberto
Residencia Profesional de Alumno de Ing. en Sistemas Computacionales del Instituto Tecnológico de Morelia
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2018-12-20
Residencia Profesional: "Desarrollo de Interfaces Web Adaptativas para Medidores Inteligentes"
Autor(es): Hernández-López, Salvador; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencias profesionales de alumno de la carrera de Ing. en Sistemas Computacionales del Instituto Tecnológico de Estudios Superiores de Zamora
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2018-12-20
Residencia Profesional: "Cyberseguridad en Medidores Inteligentes (Smart Meters) utilizando Cadenas de Bloques"
Autor(es): Covarrubias-Cisneros, César Andrés; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencia Profesional de alumno de Ing. en Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Asimilación de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2018-08-03
Delfin 2018: "SISTEMA DE MONITORES PARA MEDIDORES INTELIGENTES (SMART METERS)"
Autor(es): Mora-Lemus, Jesús Samael; Zamora-Alvarez, Miriam; Ascencio-Alonso, Romeo Jafet; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Participación en la Estancia del Programa Delfin 2018
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2018-08-03
Delfin 2018: "ROBUSTECIMIENTO DE LA PLACA RASPBERRY PI-3"
Autor(es): Zavala-Ramos, Juan Carlos; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Estancia en el Programa Delfin 2018
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
28/29

PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Difusión; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Sistemas computacionales)
2018-08-03
Residencia Profesional: Robustecimiento de la placa Raspberry Pi
Autor(es): Zavala-Ramos, Juan Carlos; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Residencia Profesional Alumno de Ing. en Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones del Instituto Tecnológico Superior de Puruandiro
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2018-01-01
Proyecto: Cyber Seguridad en Medidores Inteligentes (Smart Meters) utilizando Cadenas de Bloques
Autor(es): Molina-Moreno, Ismael; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Reyes-Archundia, Enrique
Este trabajo pretende implementar un mecanismo de cadenas de bloques que permita garantizar seguridad en las transacciones que se realizan en los sistemas de medición inteligente; esto debido a que las
cadenas de bloques son un mecanismo para almacenar información de forma distribuida, replicada y con altos mecanismos de seguridad que hacen que la integridad de los datos sean difícil de ser
manipuladas.
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2016-08-05
Asesor de Residencia Profesional de Manuel Arandas
Autor(es): Aranda-Villatoro, Manuel Alejandro; Rocha-Perez, César; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Informe de Residencias del Alumno Manuel Arandas del Tecnológico de Comitán como resultado de su estancia de verano investigación del programa delfin 2016. Cuenta con la participacion del alumno
César Rocha Pérez del Instituto Tecnológico de Acapulco
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
2016-07-31
Proyecto: Análisis e Implementación de Algoritmos de Criptografía y Criptoanálisis en Dispositivos Móviles
Autor(es): Ruiz-Lagunas, Juan Jesús; Antolino-Hernández, Anastacio; Ferreira-Medina, Heberto; Torres-Millarez, Cristhian; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Proyecto sin Financiamiento del TecNM
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
2016-03-15
Proyecto: Investigación de Métodos de Comunicación para el Diseño de Medidores Inteligentes (Smart Meters)
Autor(es): Reyes-Archundia, Enrique; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Correa, Javier
Proyecto de Investigación TecNM
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Redes)
2014-12-31
Proyecto: Future Crafts 2014: Sistema de Interconexión entre la Web 2.0 y el Internet de las Cosas
Autor(es): Torres-Millarez, Cristhian; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Proyecto con financiamiento Conacyt Convocatoria PEI 2014
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Transferencia de Tecnología; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Programación aplicada a la tecnología)
2014-06-30
Proyecto: Evaluación y Aplicación de Técnicas de Clasificación Automática de Texto en Lenguaje Natural
Autor(es): Ramos-Diaz, J.Guadalupe; Solorio-Leyva, Juan Carlos; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Jasso-García, Nicolás; Ruíz-Moreno, Sebastián
Proyecto sin financiamiento de DGEST por dos años
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Generación de Conocimiento; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
2014-06-30
Proyecto: Sistema Inteligente de Administración de Archivos sin Papel para Departamentos de Servicios Escolares del SNEST
Autor(es): Torres-Millarez, Cristhian; Antolino-Hernández, Anastacio; Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos
Proyecto con financiamiento DGEST
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Investigación Aplicada; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Software)
2013-08-31
Proyecto: Refactorización de Aplicaciones Web (ReWeb)
Autor(es): Olivares-Rojas, Juan Carlos; Aguilar-Magaña, Ignacio
Proyecto de Investigación sin Financiamiento DGEST 2012-2013
PUBLICADO EN: México; PROPÓSITO: Desarrollo Tecnológico; SECTOR → DISCIPLINA: (Tecnologías de la Información y Comunicaciones → Desarrollo Web)
Cuerpos Académicos
(ITMOR-CA-1) PROCESAMIENTO DE SEÑALES
Instituto Tecnológico de Morelia (2015) Colaborador
Procesamiento de Señales
Electrónica de Potencia
Control
Instrumentación
23/9/26, 9:20 a.m.
CVU TECNM
https://cvu.dpii.tecnm.mx/index.php/docs/extenso/
29/29